 Key Points Background Created in early 2018, the New Jersey European Heritage Association (NJEHA) is a small white supremacist group whose members see themselves as defenders of white European people and white culture. Members hold the white supremacist worldview that unless immediate action is taken, the white race is doomed to extinction by a "rising tide of color" purportedly controlled and manipulated by Jews. According to the group’s website manifesto, members “do not see the current society as a healthy and cohesive environment suited for their children and grandchildren.” They believe that “they must wrest political, economic and social control away from the hostile elite who have usurped power in America.”  By promoting their ideas to the “public mainstream” through fliering, banner drops, flash protests, and other public actions, they believe they can bypass the “controlled news and entertainment media” and establish a means of communicating with other white people. Their “creed can be summed up by fourteen simple words; we must secure the existence of our people and a future for White children.” Activity NJEHA spreads their hateful propaganda online and by distributing recruitment fliers in central New Jersey. Since March 2018, flyers promoting NJEHA have been found in and around Princeton, including at Princeton University, Freehold, Hillsborough, North Bergen, and as far north as the Sourland Mountain Preserve. In addition to flier distributions, NJEHA has also organized and participated in white supremacist rallies and demonstrations. On November 17, 2018, members walked around the town of Princeton carrying “It’s okay to be white” posters with duct tape covering their mouths “to symbolize denial of freedom of speech in their own country.” This type of demonstration was promoted on social media by Patrick Little, a virulently anti-Semitic politician from California. On August 8, 2018, NJEHA members provided security for Patrick Little when he visited the town of Princeton as part of his “Name the Jew” tour. A few days later, on August 12, NJEHA members attended the “Unite the Right 2” rally in Washington D.C.  The rally, an anniversary nod to the previous year’s violent “Unite the Right” event in Charlottesville, Virginia, was organized by white supremacist Jason Kessler. Anti-Semitism: In April 2018, the group’s website featured a “fliers” page, which urged visitors to print out racist and anti-Semitic fliers and “spread the message.” One of the available fliers, “The Truth Behind Communism and the Real Holocaust,” included language used by white supremacists and anti-Semites who deny that the Holocaust ever occurred. In addition to spreading hate through flier distributions, NJEHA members and associates routinely post racist and anti-Semitic language online. NJEHA in their own words: NJEHA activity: November 17, 2018, Princeton, New Jersey: A group of six NJEHA members and associates “marched” around Princeton holding signs that read, “It’s okay to be white.” October 12, 2018, Princeton, New Jersey: NJEHA stickers were reportedly found on the Harrison Street Bridge. The stickers read, “RECLAIM YOUR NATION RECLAIM YOUR HERITAGE.” September 29, 2018, New Brunswick and Princeton, New Jersey: NJEHA distributed propaganda urging “patriots” to “stand-up for our people and our civilization” and join the League of the South rally at Sycamore Shoals State Park in Johnson, Tennessee. That event was cancelled. September 25, 2018, Township, New Jersey: NJEHA claims to have organized a 10-mile hike and cleanup at Sourland Mountain Preserve. September 12, 2018, North Bergen, New Jersey: A NJEHA flier was found at the corner of 73rd and Bergenline Avenue warned that “The White European Peoples in America and abroad are racing towards the cliff of extinction,” and, “The future of our world is a dark one, literally and figuratively. The non-whites who will come to replace us will recreate the countries they have fled.” August 16, 2018, Princeton, New Jersey: NJEHA stickers reading, “RECLAIM YOUR NATION RECLAIM YOUR HERITAGE” were found on lamp posts in downtown Princeton. July 28, 2018, Freehold, New Jersey: NJEHA distributed propaganda at the Monmouth County Fair. August 8, 2018, Princeton, New Jersey:NJEHA members and associates provided security for Patrick Little when he visited Princeton as part of his “Name the Jew” tour.  August 12, 2018, Washington D.C.: At least four attendees of “Unite the Right 2” wore helmets adorned with stickers promoting NJEHA. April 9, 2018, Princeton, New Jersey: A NJEHA flyer was found on the FitzRandolph Gate, the official entrance of Princeton University. The flier referred to the white race as the “earth’s most endangered species.” April 20, 2018, Hillsborough, New Jersey: Fliers promoting NJEHA were found at Sourland Park. The fliers referred to the white race as the “earth’s most endangered species.” March 17, 2018, Princeton, New Jersey: Fliers supporting NJEHA were left on two kiosks in the downtown area of Princeton. One flier referred to the white race as the “earth’s most endangered species.” Another read, “RECLAIM YOUR NATION RECLAIM YOUR HERITAGE.” 
                Anti-Defamation League 
                605 Third Avenue 
                New York, NY 10158-3650 
(212) 885-7700 
                Contact Us: www.adl.org/contact 
                Tax ID/EIN: 13-1818723 

                © 2020 Anti-Defamation League. All rights reserved.
            