 If you prefer a different language, you may select one from the full list by navigating to the Select Language menu at the top of this site. Rewards for Justice The most important reasons to stop a terrorist are all around you. Stop a terrorist. Save lives. Up to $7 Million Reward    Abubakar Shekau is the leader of Jama’atu Ahl as-Sunnah il-Da’awati wal-Jihad, more commonly known as Boko Haram. Boko Haram, which means “Western education is forbidden,” is a Nigeria-based terrorist organization that seeks to overthrow the current Nigerian government and replace it with a regime based on Islamic law. The group has existed in various forms since the late 1990s.  There are reported communications, training, and weapons links between Boko Haram, al-Qaida in the Lands of the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), al-Shabaab, and al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula, which may strengthen Boko Haram’s capacity to conduct terrorist attacks. Shekau was previously the group’s second-in-command.  In July 2010, Shekau publicly claimed leadership of Boko Haram and threatened to attack Western interests in Nigeria.  Later that month, Shekau issued a second statement expressing solidarity with al-Qaida and threatening the United States.  Under Shekau’s leadership, Boko Haram’s operational capabilities have grown. The group set off its first vehicle-borne improvised explosive device (IED) in June 2011, and has increasingly utilized IEDs in attacks against soft targets. Boko Haram’s August 26, 2011 vehicle-bomb attack on the United Nations headquarters in Abuja, Nigeria marked the group’s first lethal operation against Western interests.  At least 23 people were killed, and 80 more were injured, in the attack. A purported Boko Haram spokesman claimed responsibility for the attack and promised future targeting of U.S. and Nigerian government interests. On May 1, 2012, less than one week after the group bombed a Nigerian newspaper building in Abuja, Boko Haram issued a video statement threatening more attacks on local and international news outlets, including the Voice of America and Sahara Reporters, a New York-based media service. Under Shekau’s leadership Boko Haram has continually targeted young children.  On April 14, 2014, Boko Haram kidnapped close to 300 girls from their school in northern Nigeria.  In a video message released three weeks later, Shekau claimed responsibility for the kidnappings, calling the girls slaves and threatening to sell them in the market. On June 21, 2012, the U.S. Department of State designated Shekau a Specially Designated Global Terrorist under Executive Order 13224.    Dates of Birth Used: 1965, 1969, 1975 Place of Birth: Yobe, Nigeria Height: Tall Build: Slim Sex: Male Complexion: Dark Ethnicity: Kanuri Languages: Arabic, Hausa, Fulani, Kanuri Aliases: Abu Bakr Skikwa, Imam Abu Bakr Shiku, Abu Muhammad Abu Bakr Bin Muhammad Al Shakwi Al Muslimi Bishku, Abubakar Shakkau 



                         View/Print Poster                    
