 Warfare.Today AT THE HEART OF THE FIGHTING The international military campaign has reduced the terrorist threat from this region and helped train a 350,000 strong Afghan National Security Force, which now has security responsibility for Afghanistan’s 30 million citizens. The process of handing over security to Afghan forces – ‘transition’ – saw the international military’s role change from leading combat operations to training, advising and assisting. International actions in Afghanistan since 2001 have significantly reduced the terrorist threat to the UK from this region. At its peak, in Helmand alone there were 137 UK bases and around 9,500 UK troops. On 9 August 2013, the military headquarters of the UK’s Task Force Helmand moved from Lashkar Gah to Camp Bastion. A small number of soldiers remain today to continue the training and development of the Afghan National Army and Afghan National Police. This is Operation TORAL. Operation HERRICK officially ended on 31 December 2014. Operation TORAL officially began on 1 January 2015, with the deployment of soldiers from The Rifles Regiment. At the time, the Defence Secretary, Sir Michael Fallon, said: Our Armed Forces’ tremendous sacrifice laid the foundations for a strong Afghan Security Force, set the security context that enabled the first democratic transition of power in the country’s history, and stopped it being a launch pad for terrorist attacks in the UK. Although we are ending a significant chapter in our shared history, the UK’s commitment to support Afghanistan will continue through institutional development, the Afghan National Army Officer Academy, and development aid. British Army units deployed to date include elements from: 2nd Battalion, The Rifles (2 RIFLES): January 2015 – February 2015 7th Battalion, The Rifles (7 RIFLES): January 2015 – February 2015 1st Battalion, Royal Anglian Regiment (1 R ANGLIAN): February 2015 – August 2015 Royal Highland Fusiliers, 2nd Battalion, The Royal Regiment of Scotland (2 SCOTS): July 2015 – April 2016
Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders, 5th Battalion, The Royal Regiment of Scotland (5 SCOTS): July 2015 – April 2016 6th Battalion, The Royal Regiment of Scotland (6 SCOTS): July 2015 – April 2016 133 Field Company, 103 Battalion REME: February 2016 2nd Battalion, The Royal Gurkha Rifles (2 RGR): April 2016 – December 2016 1st Battalion, Royal Irish Regiment (1 R IRISH): December 2016 – July 2017 Before their deployment, Major Dan Moore told the Belfast Telegraph: What we are going out to do is essentially provide security and force protection for Nato personnel in Kabul, both within Kabul city and also within the Afghan National Army officers academy. This tour will be much more based on support to the Afghan National Defence Security Force, as opposed to us being in the lead – we are very much there at their request and they have the lead on security matters. 2nd Battalion, The Yorkshire Regiment (2 YORKS), took over from 1 R IRISH in mid-2017. According to the British Army website, 2 YORKS is a light mechanised infantry battalion and part of 4th Infantry Brigade and HQ North East, one of the Army’s adaptable brigades. It is equipped with the Foxhound Protected Patrol Vehicle and a range of small arms and support weapons. The Foxhound is an agile and versatile vehicle perfectly fitting the battalion’s new role. 2 YORKS is commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Samuel Humphris MBE. They began mission specific training for Op TORAL 5 in March 2017. The Royal Air Force also contributes to Operation TORAL: January 2015 – March 2015: 3 Boeing Chinook HC.2’s of No. 1310 Flight RAF with 51 personnel.
April 2015 – present: 3 Westland Puma HC.2’s of Puma Force. From 1 December 2014 to 31 March 2017, there were 51 casualties and 2 fatalities, none of which were combat related. The 2 fatalities occurred when a Puma helicopter crashed in Kabul. Flight Lieutenant Alan Scott of 33 Squadron Royal Air Force, and Flight Lieutenant Geraint ‘Roly’ Roberts of 230 Squadron Royal Air Force both died in the crash on Sunday, 11 October 2015. Both officers were members of the Puma helicopter force based at RAF Benson in Oxfordshire. As the HERRICK combat operation came to an end, Brigadier Darrell Amison, Commander of Joint Force Support, Afghanistan, said: We don’t know where this country is going to go and I would not like to take a guess. There is hope for the country, whether that is seized is another matter. Time will tell. With Islamic extremists, the Taliban and ISIS-K, gaining ground in the country, the British Foreign Office still advises against travelling in most of Afghanistan today:
 There is a high threat from terrorism and specific methods of attack are evolving and increasing in sophistication. There is a high threat of kidnapping throughout the country. Travel by road throughout the country, but particularly outside the capital Kabul, is extremely dangerous. Seek professional security advice for all travel and consider using armoured vehicles. Despite all the enthusiasm for the Afghan National Army during the NATO drawdown, they are clearly not up to the job. Lack of discipline, poor leadership and widespread corruption have neutered the effectiveness of Afghanistan’s own forces. Now, NATO, the US and the UK are all considering sending more troops, ostensibly still to train and advise, but recent US actions against ISIS-K in Afghanistan demonstrate that, once again, this is turning into a combat scenario. Serious questions must now be raised concerning current military strategy. In World War II, the Allies defeated Nazi Germany – a far superior military power than the Taliban – in six years and one day; after 13 years of war in Afghanistan and another 2½ years of advise and assist, the Taliban are still there and still a force to be reckoned with. Sources: British Army; MOD; Daily Mail; Belfast Telegraph. Photo: Pictured are Afghans watching Royal Engineers from 44 (Four Four) HQ and Support Squadron installing a General Support Bridge (GSB) in the northern part of Nahr-e Seraj District of Helmand Province. To launch a bridge the Royal Engineers use the Automated Bridge Launching Equipment BR-90 (ABLE) that is capable of launching bridges up to 44 m in length. The ABLE vehicle is positioned with its rear pointing to the gap to be crossed and a lightweight launch rail extended across the gap. The bridge is then assembled and winched across the gap supported by the rail, with sections added until the gap is crossed. Once the bridge has crossed the gap the ABLE launch rail is recovered. A 32 m bridge can be built by 10 men in about 40 minutes. Pingback: 2 YORKS Get Ready for Afghanistan – Warfare.Today  You must be logged in to post a comment. Warfare.Today is an Amazon Associate and may earn from qualifying purchases.
