 Key Points The Nationalist Social Club (NSC) or 131 Crew (131 is alphanumeric code for ACA, Anti Communist Action) is a neo-Nazi group with small, autonomous regional chapters around the country. They also claim chapters in France, Hungary and Germany. NSC members consider themselves soldiers fighting a war against a hostile, Jewish-controlled system that is deliberately plotting the extinction of the white race. Their goal is to form an underground network of white men who are willing to fight against their perceived enemies through localized direct actions. “This is a W A R - and if we intend to win it, it will indeed take a tremendous amount of losses and sacrifice on our part. Any noble revolution, no matter the outcome, has been raised by solid collectives of men who were willing to sacrifice anything for their people and for their ideals. We currently do not have a sizable enough network of white men with the will to fight - and due to this we are losing. Our people are those that descended from pioneers, explorers, and conquerors. They are not moved by words, paper, and paint. They are moved by struggle and challenge. It’s now or never white man, show our enemies WHITE MEN WILL FIGHT! #131” NSC, Telegram, September 5, 2020  “Our enemies are unmoved by speeches or orderly marches, they’re moved by the idea of them getting punched in the mouth for the filth they spew. They know damn well, just as our members do, that 131 is their first and foremost opposition. Wherever they go, we go - until every last white man, woman, and child is secured in their own nations.” NSC, Telegram, August 21, 2020 “This is a war of EXTINCTION - there is no time for ego! If you represent a collective dedicated to doing something about the raping of our cities, contact us.” NSC, Telegram, August 17, 2020 Origins and membership Originally named the New England Nationalists Club (NENC), the group was started in December 2019 by a handful of neo-Nazis in Eastern Massachusetts. Led by Chris Hood, the group’s original focus was covering up anarchist and gang graffiti with their own graffiti in the areas of Worcester, Boston, Quincy, Rutland and Sturbridge.  New England Nationalist Club GAB post of NENC and 131 graffiti December 2019 In early 2020, the group rebranded as the Nationalist Social Club. It expanded in May 2020 when the white supremacist Legion of St Ambrose fell apart, and the bulk of its membership joined NSC, forming a Southern NSC chapter dubbed NSC Dixie. NSC Dixie is most active in northeastern Tennessee but has members and associates in Florida, Kentucky, Texas and Virginia. NSC added Midwest and Southwest chapters in July, picking up members in Indiana and Arizona respectively. That same month, NSC claimed supporters in France. By August, a small NSC chapter had formed in the German region of Rhine-Hesse. The group’s membership is a collection of neo-Nazis and racist skinheads, many of whom have previous membership(s) in other white supremacist groups, including Patriot Front, National Socialist Movement (NSM), The Base, League of the South (LoS), Traditionalist Worker Party (TWP) and Aryan Strike Force. Members and associates have been identified in states such as Arizona, Indiana, Kentucky, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia. Activity and Tactics Fearing extinction of the white race, NSC’s goal is to build an underground network of like-minded individuals willing “to mount a ruthless resistance” against their perceived enemies in the form of localized street actions. The group’s typical street actions include the distribution of propaganda, public demonstrations, private gatherings for networking and firearms or fitness training and efforts to “troll” or harass their aforementioned “enemies.” Propaganda. In addition to using crude graffiti to mark their territory or turf, NSC distributes propaganda in the form of stickers and fliers that often designate an area as a “131 ZONE.” In the same territorial vein, NSC distributes propaganda that encourages the reporting of “any and all communist, gang, and anti-white activity” to NSC. The fliers are backed up by online claims that NSC crews conduct “neighborhood watch patrols” and will use force to “uproot these people from your communities by any means necessary.” “Criminal gangs will find no refuge anywhere a NSC operates. Whether they are peddling ideological falsehoods, or degenerate drugs and despair - we must take tangible action to secure not only our streets, but our posterity as a whole from the violent elements which threaten them. Not just on a political or ideological level, but on a direct and even physical level. We are dealing with international criminal gangs comprised of genetic filth that push illicit drugs like fentanyl on our people while rampaging all those who stand in their way. They do not understand anything more or less than FORCE. Uproot these people from your communities by any means necessary.” NSC, Telegram, September 17, 2020 The distribution of NSC propaganda is encouraged and does not require membership. This has resulted in occasional NSC propaganda distributions in states without significant or established NSC membership such as California, Maine, Nevada and Wisconsin. NSC Propaganda images posted on Telegram July, August and September 2020 Antisemitism. NSC’s online propaganda is often antisemitic and includes the use of multiple parentheses or the “echo” symbol to indicate that entities (such as “the system” and media) are controlled by Jews or to communicate that NSC’s enemies are Jewish. NSC graffiti has referenced antisemitic conspiracy theories claiming Mossad, the Israeli intelligence agency, was behind the 9/11 attacks, and that the “proof” is the “five dancing Israelis” arrested on 9/11 who were allegedly celebrating as the Twin Towers burned. They have also included the phrase “110 and never again” in their propaganda which is used by white supremacist to urge the United States to be the next and 110th place to expel Jews. In August, NSC posted Telegram images of Virginia members posing with a Nazi flag and giving Hitler salutes outside the Virginia Holocaust Museum. The photo was captioned “NSC Virginia visits the holohoax museum.” NSC propaganda images posted on Telegram August and September 2020 Demonstrations and events. NSC participates in private gatherings and flash demonstrations that often take the form of counter-protests. They often use video and images of these activities to create online propaganda. Particularly focused on opposing the Black Lives Matter movement, members and associates of NSC counter-protested BLM events on at least five occasions during the months of June and July, 2020. They also posted videos of themselves purportedly destroying an MLK mural and burning BLM banners memorializing Breonna Taylor and George Floyd. In May, members hung a sign that read “JOGGER” on the Alex Haley statue in Knoxville, Tennessee. The word “jogger” is a newly-coined white supremacist term for a Black man, and references Ahmaud Arbery, who was murdered while jogging in his Georgia neighborhood. NSC members have joined events organized by other neo-Nazi groups. In July, several NSC members participated in a flash demonstration organized by the neo-Nazi National Socialist Movement in Williamsport, Pennsylvania. Trolling. One element of NSC activity includes efforts to troll or otherwise harass their perceived enemies.   In August, two NSC members attended a Knox County Tennessee Republican Party Election Night celebration. They later posted an image purportedly taken inside the banquet with the caption, “A couple NSC Dixie members went to a GOP election party to eat free food, drop flyers, and dab on koshervatives. The GOPers were obsessed with talking about how friendly they are with faggots and virtue signaling to liberalism. The GOP is our enemy.” In July, five NSC members drew attention when they attended a “Restore Sanity” rally in Boston holding a white supremacist sonnerad flag. The NSC later claimed their attendance of the event was an elaborate trolling effort designed to drive “normies away from blue lives rallies” and ultimately force “the (((system))) to suspect their own supporters.”  In June, NSC posted an image of a member giving a Hitler salute while standing on the porch of a residence used by a Knoxville-based antifascist group. The photo was captioned, “Just popping in to deliver some reading material to the local Antifa drug den...” Criminal Activity Hesse, Germany, September 2020: According to Belltower News, a Germany-based journalistic platform that publishes reports on far-right extremism, an NSC member was at the center of multiple police raids in Hesse. Hessian police reported that the raids resulted in the seizure of weapons and Nazi paraphernalia, and investigations for suspicion of illegal weapon possession are underway. Rogersville, Tennessee, July 2020: During a BLM rally, eight individuals associated with the NSC were arrested for disorderly conduct after they allegedly attempted to agitate protesters by yelling profanity and racial slurs. Several were photographed during the event giving Hitler salutes. After their release from the Hawkins County Jail the group posed in front of the Sherriff’s office. NSC and associates in front of Hawkins County Jail (Telegram post, July 2020)     
                Anti-Defamation League 
                605 Third Avenue 
                New York, NY 10158-3650 
(212) 885-7700 
                Contact Us: www.adl.org/contact 
                Tax ID/EIN: 13-1818723 

                © 2020 Anti-Defamation League. All rights reserved.
            