 If you prefer a different language, you may select one from the full list by navigating to the Select Language menu at the top of this site. Rewards for Justice The most important reasons to stop a terrorist are all around you. Stop a terrorist. Save lives. Up to $5 Million Reward     Yahya Haqqani is a senior Haqqani Network member who has been closely involved in the group’s terrorist, financial, and propaganda activities.  Yahya has acted as de facto head of the group when senior-most leaders Sirajuddin Haqqani (Yahya’s brother-in-law), Khalil Haqqani, and Badruddin Haqqani (deceased) were absent.  Yahya has also assumed duties as a Haqqani Network logistician and has facilitated funding for Haqqani commanders including a subordinate of now-deceased Haqqani Network commander Sangin Zadran and Haqqani Network chief of suicide operations, Abdul Rauf Zakir.  Yahya has also acted as Sirajuddin Haqqani’s Arabic interpreter and messenger. Yahya has conducted significant facilitation activities in support of Haqqani Network attacks and other activities.  In early 2013, he facilitated funding for Haqqani Network fighters.  Also in early 2013, Yahya coordinated the transfer of supplies from the United Arab Emirates to Haqqani Network senior leader Khalil Haqqani.  In 2012, Yahya coordinated the distribution of improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and communications equipment, and he also reviewed preparations for the August 7, 2012 Haqqani Network attack against a Coalition Forward Operating Base in Logar Province, Afghanistan, in which thirteen people, including eleven Afghan civilians, were wounded.  As of 2011, Yahya delivered money from Sirajuddin Haqqani to Haqqani Network commanders for operations. Yahya sometimes serves as a liaison between the Haqqani Network and al-Qaida and he has maintained ties with al-Qaida since at least mid-2009.  In this role, Yahya has provided money to al-Qaida members in the region for their personal expenses.  As of mid-2009, he acted as the Haqqani Network’s primary liaison with foreign fighters, including Arabs, Uzbeks, and Chechens. Yahya has also conducted and managed Haqqani Network and Taliban media and propaganda activities.  As of early 2012, Yahya usually met with Sirajuddin Haqqani to obtain final approval of the Taliban propaganda videos Yahya made.  Yahya has worked on Haqqani Network media activities since at least 2009 when he edited videos from fighters in Afghanistan working out of a media studio in a Haqqani Network madrassa.  As of late 2011, Yahya obtained money for Haqqani Network media expenses from Sirajuddin Haqqani or one of Sirajuddin’s surrogates. The U.S. Department of the Treasury designated Yahya Haqqani a Specially Designated Global Terrorist under Executive Order 13224 on February 5, 2014.    Date of Birth: 1982 Place of Birth: Miram Shah, Pakistan Aliases: Yaya Haqqani, Yahyah Haqqani, Haroon 



                         View/Print Poster                    
