 If you prefer a different language, you may select one from the full list by navigating to the Select Language menu at the top of this site. Rewards for Justice The most important reasons to stop a terrorist are all around you. Stop a terrorist. Save lives. Up to $5 Million Reward    Fuad Mohamed Khalaf (Fuad Shongale) has facilitated financial support to al-Shabaab; in May 2008, he held two fundraising events for al-Shabaab at mosques in Kismaayo, Somalia. In April 2008, Khalaf and several other individuals directed vehicle-borne explosive device attacks on Ethiopian bases and Transitional Federal Government (TFG) elements in Mogadishu, Somalia. In May 2008, Khalaf and a group of fighters attacked and captured a police station in Mogadishu, killing and wounding several soldiers. In April 2010, Khalaf was designated by the U.S. Department of the Treasury under Executive Order 13536 for contributing to the violence and the deterioration of security in Somalia. Al-Shabaab was the militant wing of the Somali Council of Islamic Courts that took over most of southern Somalia in the second half of 2006. Al-Shabaab has continued its violent insurgency in southern and central Somalia. The group has claimed responsibility for many bombings—including various types of suicide attacks—in Mogadishu and in central and northern Somalia, typically targeting Somali Government officials and perceived allies of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia. Al-Shabaab was likely responsible for a wave of five coordinated suicide car bombings in October 2008 that simultaneously hit targets in two cities in northern Somalia, killing at least 26 people and injuring 29 others. Al-Shabaab was responsible for the twin suicide bombings in Kampala, Uganda, on July 11, 2010, which killed more than 70 people, including one American. The group is responsible for the assassination of Somali peace activists, international aid workers, numerous civil society figures, and journalists. In February 2012, al-Shabaab and al-Qaida announced their formal alliance. The U.S. Department of State named al-Shabaab a Foreign Terrorist Organization under Section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (as amended) on February 26, 2008, and a Specially Designated Global Terrorist entity under Executive Order 13224 on February 29, 2008.    Hair: Black Eyes: Brown Sex: Male Complexion: Medium Nationality: Somali; Swedish Location: Mogadishu, Somalia Aliases: Fuad Muhammad Khalaf Shongole, Fouad Shongale, Fuad Songale, Fuad Shangole, Fuad Shongole, Fuad Shongale, Fuad Khalaf, Fuad Mohammed Khalif, Fuad Mohamed Kalaf, Fuad Mohammed Khalaf, Fuad Mohamed Qalaf, Fuad Mohamed Khalif 



                         View/Print Poster                    
