 If you prefer a different language, you may select one from the full list by navigating to the Select Language menu at the top of this site. Rewards for Justice The most important reasons to stop a terrorist are all around you. Stop a terrorist. Save lives. Up to $5 Million Reward  Jehad Serwan Mostafa, a.k.a. Ahmed Gurey, Anwar al-Amriki, or Emir Anwar; is a United States citizen and former resident of California. He has performed various functions for al-Shabaab, including acting as a training camp instructor and a leader of foreign fighters. He is also skilled in the group’s media activities. Mostafa is an American citizen who lived in San Diego, California before moving to Somalia in 2005. He may have or is likely to visit the following areas: Somalia, Yemen, Ethiopia, Kenya, and other African countries. Mostafa is on the FBI’s Most Wanted Terrorists List, and is sought by the FBI for his alleged terrorist activities. On October 9, 2009, a federal arrest warrant was issued for Mostafa in the United States District Court, Southern District of California. Mostafa was charged with the following crimes: conspiracy to provide material support to terrorists; conspiracy to provide material support to a foreign terrorist organization; and providing material support to a foreign terrorist organization. Al-Shabaab was the militant wing of the Somali Council of Islamic Courts that took over most of southern Somalia in the second half of 2006. Al-Shabaab has continued its violent insurgency in southern and central Somalia. The group has claimed responsibility for many bombings—including various types of suicide attacks—in Mogadishu and in central and northern Somalia, typically targeting Somali Government officials and perceived allies of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia. Al-Shabaab was likely responsible for a wave of five coordinated suicide car bombings in October 2008 that simultaneously hit targets in two cities in northern Somalia, killing at least 26 people and injuring 29 others. Al-Shabaab was responsible for the twin suicide bombings in Kampala, Uganda, on July 11, 2010, which killed more than 70 people, including one American. The group is responsible for the assassination of Somali peace activists, international aid workers, numerous civil society figures, and journalists. In February 2012, al-Shabaab and al-Qaida announced their formal alliance. The U.S. Department of State named al-Shabaab a Foreign Terrorist Organization under Section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (as amended) on February 26, 2008, and a Specially Designated Global Terrorist entity under Executive Order 13224 on February 29, 2008.    Date of Birth: December 28, 1981 Place of Birth: Waukesha, Wisconsin Height: 6’1” (185 cm) Weight: 170 lbs (77 kg) Build: Tall, thin Hair: Brown Eyes: Blue Sex: Male Complexion: Light Citizenship: American Languages: Arabic, Somali, English Special Identifiers: Mostafa is left-handed. He wears a full beard and glasses. He has a large scar on his right hand and a small scar on the top of his left index finger. Aliases: Emir Anwar, Ahmed Gurey, Anwar al-Amriki, Abu Abdullah al-Muhajir, “Ahmed” (moniker), “Anwar” (moniker) 



                         View/Print Poster                    
