 If you prefer a different language, you may select one from the full list by navigating to the Select Language menu at the top of this site. Rewards for Justice The most important reasons to stop a terrorist are all around you. Stop a terrorist. Save lives. Up to $5 Million Reward    Muhammad Abdullah Khalil Hussain ar-Rahayyal is wanted in connection with the September 5, 1986 hijacking of Pan Am flight 73 on the ground in Karachi, Pakistan. The individual listed above has been indicted on the following charges: Conspiracy to commit offenses against the United States; conspiracy to murder U.S. nationals outside the United States; murder of U.S. nationals outside the United States; attempted murder of U.S. nationals outside the United States; causing serious bodily injury to U.S. nationals outside the United States; hostage taking; use of a firearm during a crime of violence; placing destructive devices on an aircraft; performing an act of violence against an individual on an aircraft; aircraft piracy; malicious damage to an aircraft; and aiding and abetting. Wadoud Muhammad Hafiz al-Turki, Jamal Saeed Abdul Rahim, Muhammad Abdullah Khalil Hussain ar-Rahayyal, and Muhammad Ahmed al-Munawar have been charged in the District of Columbia for their role in the hijacking of Pan Am flight 73 on September 5, 1986 on the ground in Karachi, Pakistan. After holding the aircraft and its 379 passengers and crew, including at least 78 U.S. citizens, for about 16 hours, the hijackers started firing indiscriminately at the passengers, causing the death of at least 20 persons and seriously wounding more than 100 others. These individuals are believed to have been members of the Abu Nidal Organization, an international terrorist network.    Date of Birth: November 27, 1965 Place of Birth: Lebanon Height: 5’9” (175 cm) Hair: Black Eyes: Dark Sex: Male Complexion: Olive Nationality: Palestinian Status: Fugitive Scars and Marks: Scar under left eye, scar on right cheek Aliases: Abdullah Khalil Muhammad, Abdullah Muhammad Khalil, Khalil Antwan Iwan, Khalil Alid, Antawan Kaiwan Khalil 



                         View/Print Poster                    
