 Police in Milan say they have arrested a 39-year-old Italian woman, who has worked for Cardinal Angelo Becciu, a senior Vatican official who was demoted last month over embezzlement claims. Cecilia Marogna says she was paid €500,000 ($587,000; £454,000) by Cardinal Becciu. Ms Marogna was arrested after an Interpol warrant was issued at the Holy See's request, according to reports.  Both Ms Marogna and Cardinal Becciu have denied any wrongdoing. In interviews with Italian media in recent days, Ms Marogna confirmed that she had been paid €500,000 by Cardinal Becciu through a company she operated in Slovenia. She said she received the money to provide "parallel diplomacy" to help missionaries in conflict areas. A senior Vatican source told Reuters news agency that Ms Marogna was suspected of "embezzlement and aggravated misappropriation in complicity with others". The cardinal allegedly authorised the payments to Ms Marogna while serving as number two in the Vatican's Secretariat of State, which manages the Church's donations. "I didn't steal a single euro," Ms Marogna told newspaper Domani. She has also denied allegations that she is the cardinal's mistress, telling the newspaper Corriere della Sera that she is a "political analyst and intelligence expert" with "a network of relationships in Africa and the Middle East" to protect the Vatican's representatives abroad. Cardinal Becciu, 72, unexpectedly resigned last month, revealing he was told to do so by Pope Francis. He said he was suspected of giving Church money to his brothers.  The cardinal was involved in a controversial deal to invest in a luxury London building with Church funds, which has since been the subject of a financial investigation. The cardinal has denied any wrongdoing and has defended the London property deal.  Resignations at this level of the Vatican are extremely rare. Cardinal Becciu: Vatican official forced out in rare resignation First person receives Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine Margaret Keenan, who turns 91 next week, becomes the first person in the world to get the jab as part of a mass vaccination programme, calling it the "best early birthday present". Oxford vaccine 'safe and effective' study shows Higher exams to be cancelled for Scottish pupils How can we imagine the scale of Covid's death toll? Earth Photo winners announced Newscast: How did V-day go? Warehouse veg packer becomes top-flight footballer Archbishop and Chief Rabbi on losing a child. VideoArchbishop and Chief Rabbi on losing a child So you want a career in computer games tournaments? ‘I want to show young trans kids it gets better’ Sputnik V vaccine rushed out to wary Russians John Lennon: I was there the day he died Are lateral flow tests for Covid-19 effective? Your Newscast team investigates Daily news briefing direct to your inbox Sign up for our newsletter Oxford Covid vaccine 'safe and effective' study shows1 Coronavirus: Londoners 'must stick to rules' amid tier 3 fears2 Sir Jim Ratcliffe confirms new car to be made in France3 Louise Smith death: Shane Mays guilty of murdering teenager in woods4 Isle of Wight monolith: Designer claims responsibility for structure5 Covid-19 vaccine: First person receives Pfizer jab in UK6 Covid-19 in the UK: How many coronavirus cases are there in your area?7 Covid: Royal visit during pandemic questioned by minister8 Steve Thompson in group of ex-rugby union internationals to sue for brain damage9 Madeleine McCann: Public 'would reach same conclusion' on suspect10 The most infamous athlete of all time? iPlayerThe most infamous athlete of all time? The untold story of the slave trade. iPlayerThe untold story of the slave trade The realities of war and life under Isis. iPlayerThe realities of war and life under Isis The epic series from David Attenborough. iPlayerThe epic series from David Attenborough © 2020 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.