 The largest unexploded World War Two bomb ever found in Poland has detonated during the defusing process, a Polish Navy spokesman said. The chance the bomb - at the bottom of a Baltic Sea shipping canal - would detonate had been put at 50-50 and all the divers were unharmed. About 750 residents had been evacuated near the port city of Swinoujscie. The RAF dropped the Tallboy or "earthquake" bomb in a raid in 1945 which sank the German cruiser Lützow. Swinoujscie was part of Germany and called Swinemünde at the time of the bombardment.  The shock of the latest detonation was reportedly felt in parts of the city and a video shows the blast throwing up a large column of water into the air. The bomb was 6m (19ft) long and weighed 5.4 tonnes, nearly half of which was its explosives. The bomb was embedded at a depth of 12m and only its nose was sticking out. Naval forces used a remote-controlled device to try to "deflagrate" the bomb - a technique that if successful burns the explosive charge without causing a detonation, the BBC's Adam Easton reports from Warsaw. "The deflagration process turned into detonation. The object can be considered neutralised, it will not pose any more threat to the Szczecin-Swinoujscie shipping channel," said Lt Cmdr Grzegorz Lewandowski, spokesman for the Polish Navy's 8th Coastal Defence Flotilla. "All divers were outside the danger zone." Read more about unexploded WW2 bombs: Poland still counts losses from WW2 invasion First person receives Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine Margaret Keenan, who turns 91 next week, becomes the first person in the world to get the jab as part of a mass vaccination programme, calling it the "best early birthday present". Oxford vaccine 'safe and effective' study shows Higher exams to be cancelled for Scottish pupils How can we imagine the scale of Covid's death toll? Earth Photo winners announced Newscast: How did V-day go? Warehouse veg packer becomes top-flight footballer Archbishop and Chief Rabbi on losing a child. VideoArchbishop and Chief Rabbi on losing a child So you want a career in computer games tournaments? ‘I want to show young trans kids it gets better’ Sputnik V vaccine rushed out to wary Russians John Lennon: I was there the day he died Are lateral flow tests for Covid-19 effective? Your Newscast team investigates Daily news briefing direct to your inbox Sign up for our newsletter Oxford Covid vaccine 'safe and effective' study shows1 Coronavirus: Londoners 'must stick to rules' amid tier 3 fears2 Sir Jim Ratcliffe confirms new car to be made in France3 Louise Smith death: Shane Mays guilty of murdering teenager in woods4 Isle of Wight monolith: Designer claims responsibility for structure5 Covid-19 vaccine: First person receives Pfizer jab in UK6 Covid-19 in the UK: How many coronavirus cases are there in your area?7 Covid: Royal visit during pandemic questioned by minister8 Steve Thompson in group of ex-rugby union internationals to sue for brain damage9 Madeleine McCann: Public 'would reach same conclusion' on suspect10 The most infamous athlete of all time? iPlayerThe most infamous athlete of all time? The untold story of the slave trade. iPlayerThe untold story of the slave trade The realities of war and life under Isis. iPlayerThe realities of war and life under Isis The epic series from David Attenborough. iPlayerThe epic series from David Attenborough © 2020 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.