“Welcome to my mom’s house,” Joe Biden called from the bottom of the stairs, an instant before his sweep of white hair rose into view.

The former Vice-President of the United States and the Democratic nominee for President reached the second floor of a cottage at the foot of his property in Greenville, Delaware, a wooded, well-to-do suburb of Wilmington. He wore a trim blue dress shirt, sleeves rolled to the elbows, a pen tucked between the buttons, and a bright-white N95 mask. It was ninety-nine days to the election. The death toll from the coronavirus pandemic was approaching a hundred and fifty thousand, three times as many lives as America lost in Vietnam; the economy had crumbled faster than at any other time in the nation’s history; in Portland, Oregon, federal agents in unmarked uniforms were tear-gassing protesters, whom Donald Trump called “sick and deranged Anarchists & Agitators.” On Twitter that day, Trump warned that the demonstrators would “destroy our American cities, and worse, if Sleepy Joe Biden, the puppet of the Left, ever won. Markets would crash and cities would burn.”

The man who stands between Americans and four more years of Trump lives with his wife, Jill, on four sloping acres that overlook a small lake. These days, the Biden place feels as solemn and secluded as an abbey. To avoid contagion, Biden’s advisers had put me in a carriage house, a hundred yards from the house where the family lives. The cottage, styled in Celtic themes (green shutters, a thistle pattern on the throw pillows), doubles as a command post for the Secret Service, and large men with holstered guns stalked in and out. Biden settled into an armchair across the room from me and splayed his hands, a socially distanced salute. “The docs keep it really tight,” he explained.

Later that afternoon, the Bidens were due on Capitol Hill, to pay their respects to the recently deceased John Lewis, of Georgia, a civil-rights icon who endured a fractured skull at the hands of state troopers in Selma, Alabama, before rising to the House of Representatives and becoming known as the “conscience of Congress.” It would be a rare excursion. Since the covid shutdown began, in March, Biden had circulated mostly between his back porch, where he convened fund-raisers on Zoom, a gym upstairs, and the basement rec room, where he sat for TV interviews in front of a bookcase and a folded flag. The campaign apparatus had scattered into the homes of some twenty-three hundred employees. Biden seemed pleased to have company. Before I could ask a question, he explained the origins of the cottage. When his father, Joe, Sr., fell ill, in 2002, Biden renovated the basement of the main house and moved his parents in. “God love him, he lasted for about six months,” he said. “I thought my mom would stay.” She had other ideas. (Biden’s mother, the former Jean Finnegan, plays a formidable role in his recounting of family history. In grammar school, he recalls, a nun mocked him for stuttering, and his mother, a devout Catholic, told her, “If you ever speak to my son like that again, I’ll come back and rip that bonnet off your head.”)

After Jean became a widow, Biden said, she offered him a proposition: “She said, ‘Joey, if you build me a house, I’ll move in here.’ I said, ‘Honey, I don’t have the money to build you a house.’ She said, ‘I know you don’t.’ She said, ‘But I talked to your brothers and sister. Sell my house and build me an apartment.’ ” For years, Biden, who relied on his government salary, was among the least prosperous members of the United States Senate. (In the two years after he left the Vice-Presidency, the Bidens earned more than fifteen million dollars, from speeches, teaching, and book deals.) Biden renovated an old garage and his mother moved in. “I’d walk in and she’d be in that chair downstairs, facing the fireplace, watching television,” he said. “There’d always be a caregiver on the stool, and she’d be hearing her confession.”

Joe Biden has been a “public man,” as he puts it—holding office, giving interviews, dispensing anecdotes—for five decades. I last interviewed him, mostly about foreign affairs, in 2014, when he was in the White House and Donald Trump was hosting Season 14 of “The Apprentice.” Biden is seventy-seven years old, and he looks thinner than he did six years ago, but not markedly so. His verbiage is as meandering as ever. James Comey, the former F.B.I. director, once wrote that the typical Biden conversation originated in “Direction A” before “heading in Direction Z.” (In December, Biden’s campaign released a doctor’s summary of his medical records, which pronounced him a “healthy, vigorous” man of his age.)

The implications of age, in one form or another, hover over the Presidential race. Trump took office as the oldest President in history; he is now seventy-four. To deflect questions about his mental acuity, he and his allies present Biden as senile, a theme that dominates right-wing TV and Twitter. Biden sees little of it; he doesn’t look at social media. If there is something big, his staff will include a tweet in the morning roundup of news that he reads on his phone. But, he said, “I don’t look at a lot of the comments. I spend the time trying to focus on the trouble people are in right now.”

By the end of August, ten weeks before the election, Biden led Trump by an average of at least eight percentage points. But no earthly inhabitant expected an ordinary end to the campaign. Some polls showed the race tightening, and Trump and the G.O.P. held a persistent advantage in perceptions of their handling of the economy. “I feel good about where we are,” Biden said. “But I know that it’s going to get really, really ugly.” As Trump disputed the legitimacy of mail-in voting, his Postmaster General was brazenly cutting service in ways that could prevent ballots from being counted. Trump’s campaign was trying to deter Black voters, running commercials claiming that, as one put it, Biden had “destroyed millions of Black lives”; Republican operatives were helping Kanye West, the pro-Trump hip-hop star, get on the ballot in multiple states. Meanwhile, U.S. intelligence warned that, as in 2016, Russians were working to damage Trump’s opponent, this time with phone recordings edited to support the canard that Biden had used the Vice-Presidency to help his son Hunter make money in Ukraine.

ADVERTISEMENT
For a front-runner, Biden was hardly sanguine. “I am worried about them screwing around with the election outcome,” he said. “When the hell have you heard a President say, ‘I’m not sure I’ll accept the outcome’?”

The trials of 2020 have dismantled some of the most basic stories we Americans tell ourselves. The world’s richest, most powerful country has botched even rudimentary responses to the pandemic—finding masks, making tests—and some agencies have proved to be so antiquated and starved of resources that they’ve used fax machines to share data. The White House offered policies that read like mock Kafka; even as people were advised against dining out, it was proposing a corporate tax break on business meals. On Fox News in April, Jared Kushner, the President’s son-in-law and one of the leaders of the coronavirus response, declared the Administration’s effort “a great success story.” Since then, at least a hundred and ten thousand more people have died. And, in the midst of the pandemic, the death of George Floyd under a policeman’s knee opened a second epochal turn in American history—a reckoning with the entrenched hierarchy of power, which Isabel Wilkerson, in her new book, “Caste,” calls “the wordless usher in a darkened theater, flashlight cast down in the aisles, guiding us to our assigned seats.”

An officer strumming a guitar interrogates a suspect another officer holding a banjo stands outside the interrogation...
“Don’t feel like talking? Fine. Maybe it’s time you had a little chat with my partner.”
Cartoon by Matthew Diffee
Biden believes that Trump’s failures of leadership, particularly in the pandemic, have become clear even to steadfast Republican advocates. “Everybody knows, even people supporting him: This is all about his self-interest. It’s all about him,” he told me. “It has had profound impacts on people’s ability to live their life.” Still, it might not suffice to change voters’ minds. When Biden characterizes Trump’s supporters, they are not duped or culpable or deplorable. “They think that they will be materially better off if he’s President,” he said. “He has gotten through, I think, to some degree—to about forty per cent—saying, ‘The Democrats are socialists. They’re here to take away everything you have.’ ”

VIDEO FROM THE NEW YORKER
Voter Intimidation Returns to America

Republicans have long accused Democrats of plotting to smuggle socialism into the United States. But levelling that charge against Biden, whose career has been distinguished mostly by careful centrism, is an awkward task. Biden entered the Democratic primaries with a narrow goal: to end the Trump Presidency. Most Americans, he argued, did not want a revolution. At an early fund-raiser in New York, he promised not to “demonize” the rich and said that “nothing would fundamentally change.” (Online, people circulated mock campaign posters, in the color-block style of Obama’s “Hope” picture, with the slogan “Nothing Would Fundamentally Change.”) But, by the time Biden effectively clinched the nomination, in March, he had begun to describe his candidacy as a bid for systemic change on the scale of Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal. According to a senior aide to Bernie Sanders, Biden told Sanders, in a phone call about a possible endorsement, “I want to be the most progressive President since F.D.R.”

That evolution has confounded critics on all sides. Biden was simultaneously accused of being a socialist puppet and a neoliberal shill. To his detractors on the left—especially younger, highly educated, more ideological Democrats who are active online—Biden was a creature of the ancien régime and a cheerleader of the national-security state, with such timid appetites for change that, when he won on Super Tuesday, the price of health-care stocks went up. Liberals were dismayed that the most diverse Presidential field in history had yielded a white man in his eighth decade. It was as if a waiter had returned from the kitchen with news that the specials were gone, and all that was left was oatmeal. (Of course, they always had the option of more rat poison.)

Maurice Mitchell, the national director of the Working Families Party, told me, “People said, ‘Oh, this man’s a hack.’ He’s not an ideological person, and ideology clearly matters to us. He was running a retrograde candidacy during the primary. It was all about going back to the track we were on with the Obama years.” Mitchell, who is also a leader in the Movement for Black Lives, said that Biden’s change of tone caught the attention of progressives: “He’s recognizing that this might be a Rooseveltian moment. He’s not all the way there—nobody thinks Joe Biden is a progressive star—but he can be a product of either your most cynical thinking or a product of your most optimistic thinking.”

In a recent interview, I asked Barack Obama how he interprets Biden’s swerve to the left. “If you look at Joe Biden’s goals and Bernie Sanders’s goals, they’re not that different, from a forty-thousand-foot level,” he argued. “They both want to make sure everybody has health care. They want to make sure everybody can get a job that pays a living wage. They want to make sure every child gets a good education.” The question was one of tactics, Obama suggested. “A lot of times, the issue has to do with ‘How do we go about that, and what are the coalitions we need?’ ” he said. “What I think the moment has done is to change some of those calculations, not because necessarily Joe’s changed but because circumstances have changed.”

The tensions afflicting the Democratic Party reflect a clash between liberal meliorism—the “long view” politics of Obama and Biden—and the impatient movement that Sanders calls a “revolution.” The two factions claim competing virtues: one emphasizes realism, coalition-building, and practical politics, and the other the inescapable evidence that “reform” has failed to confront pervasive inequalities, the cruelties of American health care and incarceration, and ecological catastrophe.

The division is as much generational as it is ideological. Young Americans have been reared on fiascoes—the invasion of Iraq, the response to Hurricane Katrina, the 2008 financial crisis—and have come to blame that record partly on gerontocracy. The median American is thirty-eight years old. The median U.S. senator is sixty-five. The current Congress is among the oldest in history. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell is seventy-eight; House Speaker Nancy Pelosi is eighty. The difference in age often underlies a profound difference in world view. In the words of Patrick Fisher, a Seton Hall professor who specializes in the political dynamics of age, “Demographically, politically, economically, socially and technologically, the generations are more different from each other now than at any time in living memory.”

Millennials constitute the largest generation in America today, and the most diverse in the nation’s history. They entered the job market during the worst recession since the nineteen-thirties. People under twenty-five have faced unemployment rates more than double those of other age groups. By 2012, a record number of adults between eighteen and thirty-one were living with their parents. In the twenty-tens, as Trumpism was germinating on the right, a rival political movement was growing on the left, driven by young people. Many had put their hopes in Obama, and concluded that if he could not marshal political parties to act then nobody could. Between 2013 and 2017, the median age of members of the Democratic Socialists of America dropped from sixty-eight to thirty-three. Many others expressed a desire for a socialism that was closer to the New Deal. In 2019, Greta Thunberg, the Swedish teen-ager who inspired a global climate strike, told the United Nations, “Change is coming, whether you like it or not.”

When I asked Obama about the tensions in the Party, he cast them as features of “the traditional Democratic idea.” He said, “You have a big-tent party. And that means that you tolerate, listen to, and embrace folks who are different than you, and try to get them in the fold. And so you work with not just liberal Democrats, but you work with conservative Democrats—and you are willing to compromise on issues.” That was a gentle jab at Democrats who see compromise as a failing. In comments last year, Obama bemoaned the emergence of a “circular firing squad” in the Party. “This idea of purity, and you’re never compromised, and you’re always politically woke, and all that stuff, you should get over that quickly,” he said.

Biden has expressed frustration with young people’s tepid participation in elections. Last year, he griped that, as Trump won in 2016, “they sat home, didn’t get involved.” Yet, when we spoke recently, he took pains to sound more conciliatory. “This generation has really been screwed,” he said. “These were really the most open, the least prejudiced, the brightest, the best-educated generation in American history. And what’s happening? They end up with 9/11, they end up with a war, they end up with the Great Recession, and then they end up with this. This generation deserves help in the middle of this crisis.”

In the spring, Biden began describing himself as a “transition candidate,” explaining, “We have not given a bench to younger people in the Party, the opportunity to have the focus and be in focus for the rest of the country. There’s an incredible group of talented, newer, younger people.” Ben Rhodes, an adviser to Obama in the White House, said, “It’s actually a really powerful idea. It says, ‘I’m a seventy-seven-year-old white man, who was a senator for thirty years, and I understand both those limitations and the nature of this country.’ Because, no matter what he does, he cannot completely understand the frustration of people in the streets. That’s not a criticism. It’s just a reality.” A senior Obama Administration official observed that Biden’s acknowledgment also contained a subtler message: “This country needs to just chill the fuck out and have a boring President.”

To Varshini Prakash, a twenty-seven-year-old co-founder of the Sunrise Movement, an organization that presses for action on climate change, Biden recognized the urgency of showing more than rhetorical interest in the young left. “You have a Presidential candidate who essentially staked his career on advocating incremental solutions,” she told me. “Then he finds himself at this moment where people are fed up with much of the status quo he represents—an economic system that has reigned supreme for forty years, that he was part of advocating for, but also health, climate, gun violence, immigration. All of these have reached a fever pitch. I think covid-19 was the moment that pushed it over the edge, where he recognized if he doesn’t have a way to meet his incrementalism with the level of transformative change that people are crying out for, he’s going to be in deep trouble.”

For the ride to Lewis’s memorial, Biden boarded an armored black S.U.V. He had changed from campaign-from-home attire into mourning clothes—a crisp white shirt, dark suit and tie, and black mask. At the Capitol Rotunda, he and Jill were met by Nancy Pelosi, whom they hadn’t seen since the lockdowns began. They huddled in conversation, and then the Bidens approached Lewis’s flag-draped casket, which rested on the spot where Abraham Lincoln lay in state, a century and a half ago. Like others, Biden had challenged Republicans to honor Lewis by restoring the Voting Rights Act—to “protect the sacred right to vote that he was willing to die for,” as Biden put it. The law had served as a check on racial discrimination at the polls from 1965 to 2013, when the Supreme Court ruled that conditions no longer required it. Since then, Republicans in many states have expanded efforts to bar voters through specious requirements; in the Senate, McConnell has blocked bills seeking to restore the act.

In the preceding days, Lewis’s casket had retraced an arc of the Black freedom struggle, beginning in his home town of Troy, Alabama, crossing the Edmund Pettus Bridge, in Selma, and stopping at the newly christened Black Lives Matter Plaza, near the White House. At the Capitol, Biden laid his hand on the casket and made the sign of the cross.

Trump, for his part, had skipped the memorial. Lewis once declared that he was not a “legitimate President,” to which Trump responded, in an unsubtle slur, that Lewis’s congressional district was “crime infested.” Under pressure to say something, Trump had tweeted, on the way back from golf, that he was saddened, and that “Melania and I send our prayers to he and his family.”

In the Presidential race, the upheavals of 2020 have afforded Trump abundant opportunities to look racist and inept, while sparing Biden, a famously loose-lipped campaigner, the risks of slogging through a full schedule. His aides disputed suggestions that they have been purposely allowing Trump to hog the spotlight, but, in May, Biden said frankly, “The more he talks, the better off I am.”

Reticence has never been Biden’s default mode. Even in Washington, the windbag Mecca, he distinguished himself. When Obama, newly elected to the Senate, heard Biden hold forth in a meeting of the Foreign Relations Committee, he passed an aide a three-word note: “Shoot. Me. Now.” A former longtime staffer recalled that he learned to flex his knees during the boss’s speeches to avoid fainting. Biden knows his reputation and sometimes jokes about it. When his microphone once malfunctioned during a television interview, he said, “They do this to me at the White House all the time.”

Biden’s conspicuous appetite for human connection was likely a big factor in his primary victory. Pete Buttigieg, one of his opponents, observed Biden backstage before a debate. “Some candidates would be talking to each other,” he told me. “Some candidates would be talking almost to themselves.” But Biden was kibbitzing with the stagehands or trying to buck up the newcomer candidates. “I think any human being who’s around is somebody that he’s equally happy to engage and talk to and listen to,” Buttigieg said.

Biden vacillates between embracing the image of a kindly grandfather and bridling at it. When, in 2015, the late-night host Stephen Colbert referred to him on the air as a “nice old man,” Biden called him the next day, Colbert told me: “He goes, ‘Listen, buddy, you call me a nice old man one more time and I will personally come down there and kick your ass.’ I laughed, and he laughed. I said, ‘Don’t worry. I won’t call you a nice old man, because clearly you’re not that nice.’ ”

A person at a sleepover tells a scary story about an undelivered package.
“And no matter how many times they got it redelivered they were never home to receive the package.”
Cartoon by Drew Panckeri
In truth, Biden’s effusiveness has always disguised a prickly side. Among staff, he is known for giving support to talented people without connections, but he can also be curt and demanding, leaving the menial work of fund-raising to others. He sometimes lavishes more gratitude on strangers who want selfies than on aides who have spent years keeping him in office. Jeff Connaughton, a disenchanted former aide, once called Biden an “egomaniacal autocrat.” But Connaughton, who became a lobbyist, also admired Biden’s contempt for the corrupting glad-handing of Washington. “Biden never lifted a finger for me or for one of my clients,” he wrote, in his book, “The Payoff.” “Unlike most of Congress, he hardly ever schmoozed with the Permanent Class. He did the best he could to stay as far away from it as possible.”

ADVERTISEMENT
For all his longevity in Washington, Biden has never quite belonged to the technocratic élite. To the dominant Democrats—the Clinton and Obama circles—he was too mawkish with the Scranton Joe routine, too transparent in his ambition. Biden is the first Democratic nominee without an Ivy League degree since Walter Mondale, in 1984. In a milieu of Rhodes Scholars and former professors, he is thin-skinned about condescension, real and imagined. When Obama chose him as his running mate, he said, “I want your point of view, Joe. I just want it in ten-minute increments, not sixty-minute increments.” Biden chafed, telling David Axelrod, Obama’s chief strategist, “I still think I’d be the best President.” But, after a year of observing Obama, Biden told Axelrod that he had been mistaken: “The right guy won, and I’m just really proud to be associated with him.”

Biden’s insecurities fed a certain openness and vulnerability. Even after decades in national office, he talked to anyone in reach, partly because he was trawling for what others knew and he did not. The senior Obama Administration official, who periodically briefed Biden, recalled, “He would talk for ninety per cent of the conversation. And yet he always picked something up. At the end, we’d get up and walk out, and he’d clap me on the back: ‘Great talk.’ And I’d be a bit dazed.” The official added, “So the question is which Joe Biden governs: The one that is sincerely open and searching for the perspectives that will help him be more effective? Or the Joe Biden that will talk at you because he thinks he has enough words and expertise to muscle through any situation?”

In the usual telling, Joseph Robinette Biden, Jr., is a product of the Silent Generation, the cohort of cautious Americans born between the Great Depression and the end of the Second World War, who were too young to have fought overseas and too old to lead the counterculture. To be born in America in 1942 as a white heterosexual male was, generally speaking, to win a cosmic lottery. Because of low birth rates during the Depression and the war, the generation was exceptionally small—the first in American history to be smaller than the one before it. Its members enjoyed more attention and resources from their parents, smaller class sizes, and high rates of college admission. The New Deal and the G.I. Bill gave them benefits, loans, and federal work programs, which thrust millions of white Americans into the middle class. The sociologist Elwood Carlson, assessing their fortunes in his book “The Lucky Few,” described an age when American companies expanded workforces, built pensions, and distributed stock—a combination that produced “the financially luckiest generation of the twentieth century.”

Their advantages shaped their ideas about government, money, race, and opportunity. They were a homogeneous lot; nearly nine out of ten were white and born in the United States. They tended, as Carlson put it, to “view their successes in life as their own achievements, rather than thinking in terms of the social context that made their success possible.” In politics, their right wing included “the most conservative Republicans of any generation in the twentieth century.”

Biden fit the mold in some respects and defied it in others. The eldest of four siblings, he was ten when his father, out of a job, moved the family to Delaware, where he cleaned boilers and sold used cars. Joe was a middling but popular student at Archmere Academy, a private day school; to defray his tuition, he worked on a grounds crew. While at the University of Delaware, he played football and worked one summer as a lifeguard at a public pool, where he came to know young Black men who lived in a nearby housing project. Brett Gadsden, a historian at Northwestern University who grew up near Wilmington and has written about its racial politics, describes the city as suspended between North and South—closer to New York City than to Raleigh, but still so segregated that African diplomats, driving through on the way to Washington, were sometimes denied service at rest stops. “There’s probably a metaphorical lesson in the fact that Biden hails from a place that has this mythical reputation as a middle-ground state,” Gadsden told me. “It’s emblematic of a kind of imagined center.”

Biden played bit parts in protests against segregation, including walking out of a Wilmington diner that refused to serve a Black classmate in 1961 and picketing the segregated Rialto movie theatre the following year. Later, he sometimes exaggerated his role (“I marched”), but in 2013, during a ceremony commemorating the march in Selma, Biden expressed remorse that he had not done more. “I was involved in my state, in a small way, which was still fighting the lingering vestiges of Jim Crow,” Biden told the audience, “but I regret and, although it’s not part of what I’m supposed to say, apologize. It took me forty-eight years to get here. I should’ve been here.”

He attended, barely, Syracuse University’s law school, where he had to repeat a course because he failed to properly footnote a paper in his first year. (He claimed to have skipped so many classes that he didn’t know the rules.) He met Neilia Hunter, an English major, and, in the solemn prose of his memoir, “Promises to Keep,” “I fell ass over tin cup in love.” They married, Biden became a public defender, and, in 1972, after a short stint on a county council, he made an audacious run for the U.S. Senate. He was an underdog, polling thirty points behind J. Caleb Boggs, a low-energy incumbent. Biden, twenty-nine years old, played up his youth, campaigning with his photogenic family and publishing ads with the tagline “He understands what’s happening today.” The Wilmington Evening Journal observed that voters his age “get that ‘new hero’ look when Biden raps about how the old guard has bungled things.” He won, by just three thousand votes.

On the afternoon of December 18th, a few weeks after the election, Biden’s life came apart. Neilia was behind the wheel of the family’s white Chevy station wagon, returning with their three kids from buying a Christmas tree. A tractor-trailer, loaded with corncobs, hit them broadside, leaving the road littered with campaign brochures. Neilia and Naomi, the baby, were killed. Hunter, age two, suffered a head injury; Beau, who was three, was hospitalized for weeks with broken bones.

Biden, who had lived a life of almost preposterous good fortune, thought of suicide. In “What It Takes,” the classic study of the minds of politicians, Richard Ben Cramer wrote of Biden’s grief about the accident: “All of it, all of them—all they’d done—did not matter. Gone.” The press wanted a simple tale of a brave widower, Cramer wrote, but “Joe was so sick of it, he could puke.”

Biden considered resigning his Senate seat, but was talked out of it by a Party elder, Mike Mansfield. As a single father, he took to riding the train back to Delaware each night from Washington. Ted Kaufman, one of Biden’s closest aides, told me, “Six months after the accident, he would come into the office and he would be in as bad a shape as he was the day of the accident. He had one of Neilia’s rings, and he’d put it on his little finger. If he came into the office with that ring on his finger—oh, boy, you knew he was really hurting.”

Over the years, Biden learned tactics for coping. He kept a pen and pad beside his bed and rated each day from one to ten, to track his progress. He adopted his father’s belief that fate eventually apportions each person, or each family, a balanced ledger of fortune. “The bigger the highs,” he liked to say, “the deeper the troughs.”

When Biden arrived in the Senate, in 1973, he focussed mainly on staying there. A freshman profile in Washingtonian magazine noted, “Senator Biden doesn’t believe issues make much difference in an election—personality and presentation are the key.” In office, he was careful to avoid becoming known as a liberal.

National partisan polarization was at a historic low, and voters often divided their loyalties among candidates from multiple parties. In 1974, on the basis of his support of civil rights and opposition to the war in Vietnam, Biden received a high rating from Americans for Democratic Action, a progressive nonprofit group. He complained about it. “Those ADA ratings get us into so much trouble that a lot of us sit around thinking up ways to vote conservative,” he told a reporter. “When it comes to civil rights and civil liberties, I’m a liberal, but that’s it. I’m really quite conservative on most other issues. My wife said I was the most socially conservative man she had ever known.”

At a community meeting that summer, white suburbanites heckled Biden for his willingness to support court-ordered busing. He became their champion—the Democratic Party’s leading anti-busing crusader. Gadsden, of Northwestern, was among the students in the Wilmington area who were bused to a mostly Black school over Biden’s opposition. “Personally, I think my classmates and I benefitted greatly from the opportunity,” he told me. “It is understandable, in a strict political sense, that Biden opposed busing in the early nineteen-seventies. As a matter of history, however, Biden purposefully chose to ignore a long record of violations against the constitutional rights of Black children.” That put him “squarely within the liberal retreat from civil rights that dates back to the busing backlash and runs through President Clinton’s politics of triangulation,” he said.

As Biden rose in the Senate, he was rebuilding his family. On a blind date, in 1975, he met Jill Jacobs, an aspiring teacher from the Philadelphia suburbs. Jacobs puzzled over the man who was, as she put it, “nothing like the side-burned, bell-bottom-wearing guys I was used to dating.” They married in 1977. (In their White House years, Jill Biden taught English at Northern Virginia Community College, becoming the first-known sitting Second Lady to hold a paying job.)

Biden’s ambitions and insecurities periodically bedevilled him. Running for President in 1987, he took to quoting the British Labour leader Neil Kinnock, then stopped mentioning Kinnock and kept using the words. Reporters linked that plagiarism—an unconscious mistake, he said—with his rejected paper in law school, and, at an event, a voter pressed him about his record. Biden seethed. “I probably have a much higher I.Q. than you do,” he said, bragging that he’d received “a full academic scholarship” and “ended up in the top half of my class,” neither of which was true. His race was over. (For years, he blamed the loss on opposition research and an overzealous press. But, in 2007, when he was running for President again, he put the excuses aside. “The bottom line was, I made a mistake, and it was born out of my arrogance,” he told a reporter. “I didn’t deserve to be president.”)

In the Senate, Biden accrued a record that, to today’s progressives, resembles the counts in an indictment. Overseeing the confirmation hearings of the Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas, he failed to insure that Anita Hill’s accusations of sexual harassment were fairly and fully examined. He voted for the deregulation of Wall Street, the Defense of Marriage Act, the North American Free Trade Agreement, the war in Iraq. During the primaries, Elizabeth Warren faulted him for having legislated “on the side of the credit-card companies.” Jacobin, the socialist magazine, described him in a headline as “the Forrest Gump of the Democratic Party’s Rightward Turn.”

ADVERTISEMENT
Nothing in Biden’s record has dogged him more than his role in drafting the 1994 crime bill, the most sweeping legislation of its kind in American history. The bill contributed to the problems of mass incarceration by creating a federal “three strikes” law, encouraging longer jail terms, and granting billions of dollars to states to build more prisons.

A third explorer with Lewis and Clark is carried away by a hawk.
“Make sure people remember Lewis and Clark and Scherling!”
Cartoon by Benjamin Schwartz
At the time, the bill had support from some Democrats on the left, including Bernie Sanders, and from Black political leaders, including Representative James E. Clyburn, of South Carolina. Clyburn had learned through difficult experience that many of his Black constituents were less enthusiastic than white liberals about criminal-justice reform. At a town-hall meeting in 1994, he had voiced skepticism about an initiative for stricter sentences. “I got my head handed to me in that meeting, and everybody in that meeting was Black,” Clyburn told me recently. “Crack cocaine was a scourge in the Black communities. They wanted it out of those communities, and they had gotten very tough on drugs. And that’s why yours truly, and other members of the Congressional Black Caucus, voted for that 1994 crime bill.” Clyburn, like Biden, remains proud that the bill included the Violence Against Women Act, a ban on assault weapons, and money for community policing and drug courts. In the fall of 1994, Republicans took control of the House, and Clyburn faults them for changes they instituted. “They kept all the punitive stuff and got rid of the good stuff,” he said. Biden has offered similarly qualified regrets. “I know we haven’t always gotten things right, but I’ve always tried,” he said last year. “We thought we were told by the experts that crack, you never go back—that it was somehow fundamentally different. It’s not different. But it has trapped an entire generation.”

In “Locking Up Our Own,” a Pulitzer Prize-winning study of criminal justice and racial politics, James Forman, Jr., describes mass incarceration as the consequence of “a series of small decisions, made over time, by a disparate group of actors.” At bottom, they could be traced to what Forman calls the “politics of responsibility,” a theory of personal discipline, consonant with the individualism of the Silent Generation and the boomers, that was voiced regularly at the top of the Democratic Party. In Bill Clinton’s Inaugural Address in 1993, he vowed to “offer more opportunity to all and demand more responsibility from all.” In addition to the crime bill, the politics of responsibility inspired welfare reform in 1996, which limited federal benefits for the poor, and bankruptcy legislation in 2005, supported by Biden, which made it harder for Americans to resolve their debts.

When I asked Cornell William Brooks, a Harvard professor, an activist, and a former head of the N.A.A.C.P., to assess Biden’s record in Washington, he offered an image reminiscent of Biden’s mental ledger of highs and lows. “People love the fact that he faithfully and well served the nation’s first African-American President—and hate his leadership on the crime bill. They are troubled by his positions on busing, but they measure him as a historical whole, and by the stature of his sincerity,” Brooks said. “The things which are most disquieting about Joe Biden, to the progressive wing of the Democratic base, are the very things that are most disquieting about the Democratic Party.”

The Obama Presidency was supposed to mark a new chapter in the generational story of American politics, the triumph of what Stacey Abrams, the voting-rights activist and former Georgia gubernatorial candidate, calls the “new American majority”—a coalition of “people of color, young people, and moderate to progressive whites.” In 2008, Obama won an astonishing two-thirds of millennials.

When Obama asked Biden to join the ticket, some Democrats were baffled. Biden, running as a candidate in that year’s primaries, had failed to crack one per cent in the Iowa caucuses. But Obama admired his feisty debate performance, his knowledge of foreign leaders, and his connections in D.C. Biden was also, as Axelrod put it to me, “culturally and geographically well situated”: he made Obama more attractive to older working-class Midwestern whites, who might not feel a natural connection to a Black former community organizer. Beneath the raw electoral calculation, Biden and Obama shared a basic belief that Americans craved unity in politics. Running for President, Obama called attention to fraying social bonds. He told an audience in 2008, “I’m talking about an empathy deficit, the inability to recognize ourselves in one another, to understand that we are our brother’s keeper and our sister’s keeper—and, in the words of Dr. King, we are all tied together in a ‘single garment of destiny.’ ”

Biden’s vision was less transcendent. “Look,” he told me, “I never expect a foreign leader I’m dealing with, or a colleague senator, a congressperson, to voluntarily appear in the second edition of ‘Profiles in Courage.’ So, you got to think of what is in their interest.” And yet Biden’s accounting of political interests sometimes nudged him closer to progressives. In May, 2012, while Obama was weighing an endorsement of same-sex marriage, Biden beat him to it, telling an interviewer that he was “absolutely comfortable” with the idea. Obama’s aides were incensed. A former Biden staffer recalled, “We were told that his public activities were going to be curtailed for the week.” Many outsiders saw the moment as a typical Biden gaffe, but White House officials recognized a pattern in Biden’s calculations. “He is very much a weathervane for what the center of the left is,” the senior Obama Administration official told me. “He can see, ‘O.K., this is where the society is moving. This is where the Democratic Party is moving, so I’m going to move.’ ”

As the country recovered from the financial crisis, Biden distributed stimulus funds and managed a vast array of local and state interests; later, he used his sway with Congress to help pass the Affordable Care Act. At times, though, Democrats grew irritated by Biden’s belief that he could manage Republican leaders toward compromise. In the last days of 2012, Bush-era tax cuts were set to expire, which would have raised $3.7 trillion in revenue over the next decade. To try to keep the tax cuts, Republicans threatened to default on the U.S. debt for the first time in history. Biden negotiated a last-minute compromise with McConnell: they agreed to recoup six hundred billion dollars of that revenue, while allowing some tax cuts to become permanent. Harry Reid, the Senate Majority Leader, was said to be so appalled by the terms that he threw the paperwork in a fireplace. (Reid denies this.)

A few months later, Biden’s personal life changed in a way that shadowed his remaining years in the White House. In the summer of 2013, his son Beau, who was the attorney general of Delaware and a father of two, was diagnosed as having glioblastoma, an aggressive form of brain cancer. Father and son were unusually close; Biden sometimes told friends that Beau had “all of my best qualities and none of my worst.” Beau entered a gruelling regimen of surgery and experimental treatments. In a highly personal book about those years, “Promise Me, Dad,” Biden recalled telling Obama that he planned to take out a second mortgage, to cover the mounting bills. “Don’t do that,” Obama said. “I’ll give you the money. I have it. You can pay me back whenever.” (Biden never took him up on it.) On May 30, 2015, Beau died, at the age of forty-six. In his diary, Biden wrote, “It happened. My God, my boy. My beautiful boy.”

For years after the car crash, Biden had talked about it only occasionally; he worried how people would respond, and vulnerability clashed with the bluff style of his generation. Now aides saw a change. “The whole Beau experience just killed off the arrogant stuff,” a former colleague told me.

In the fall of 2015, Biden went on “The Late Show,” hosted by Stephen Colbert. They had some shared experience: when Colbert was a child, his father and two brothers died in a plane crash. Before the taping, they met alone backstage. “It was one of the most compact and affecting conversations I think I’ve ever had,” Colbert told me. During the interview, Biden talked about mourning his son, struggling to retain his composure. Colbert, informed by his own experience, saw a purpose in putting that anguish in public view. “He expresses the loneliness of grief and makes you feel less alone,” he told me.

ADVERTISEMENT
Biden’s association with pain and resilience at times puts him outside the usual bounds of retail politics. “People come up to him, and this is all they want to talk about: ‘How do I get through it?’ ” Mike Donilon, his chief strategist, said. When Biden and Obama worked a rope line, Biden sometimes took so long that aides had to re-start the soundtrack. Reporters and operatives joked that this was Biden’s timeworn shtick, lingering too long for pictures and gabbing about his team, the Phillies. People who have worked with him describe it differently. “The music will be blaring, and people will be screaming for a selfie, and some staff person will be pushing him on, and he will just stop,” Donilon said. “He will sit there, and he will talk to this person.”

In the summer of 2017, Biden was in semi-retirement, working to support cancer research and telling anyone in earshot that he could have beaten Trump. (He had considered running in 2016, but was still mourning his son’s death. Besides, he later recalled, with evident pique, Obama was “convinced I could not beat Hillary.”)

That August, after white supremacists carried torches through Charlottesville, Virginia, Biden watched as Trump spoke approvingly of the “very fine people” on both sides. “I thought, Holy God, this guy is going to be so much worse than I thought he was,” Biden told me. He read “How Democracies Die,” by the Harvard political scientists Steven Levitsky and Daniel Ziblatt, and heard echoes of it in the headlines. “Look what’s being done. Look what’s being said. Not just by him but by his followers and some of his elected colleagues,” Biden said. Trump’s actions played on a reservoir of existing anger, he thought: “It didn’t just happen with Trump. I’m not even sure Trump understands it.”

Many of Biden’s primary opponents—notably Sanders and Warren—were running forthrightly progressive campaigns: a Green New Deal, Medicare for All, free public college, decriminalized borders. They were winning widespread support, especially among young people. By the end of this decade, millennials and Generation Z are on pace to constitute a majority of America’s eligible voters. In 2018, twenty millennials were elected to Congress, including Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, a Sanders supporter and a democratic socialist who upset a powerful moderate Democrat in the Bronx. But Biden believed that his peers had missed a crucial lesson of the midterm elections: forty-three House districts had moved from Republicans to Democrats, as some older, moderate voters recoiled from Trump’s party. “We won by not going after the opponent but after the issues underlying what the opponent supported,” he told me. “They were running against Obamacare, and all of a sudden you heard them say, ‘I didn’t say I was for doing away with that.’ ” Biden had a chance with some fed-up Trump voters, according to Samuel Popkin, a veteran pollster and the author of “Crackup,” a forthcoming book on the Republican Party. “Farm bankruptcy is near the highest it’s been in thirty years,” Popkin said. In 2018, Trump flew to Wisconsin, promising what he called the “eighth wonder of the world”—a factory to be built for Foxconn, the Taiwanese electronics company. “Foxconn barely built anything in Wisconsin,” Popkin said.

In planning his campaign, Biden focussed on reforms that stopped well short of revolution. Instead of Medicare for All, he wanted to augment Obamacare, by lowering the Medicare eligibility age from sixty-five to sixty, and adding a “public option”—an idea that was considered radical a decade ago but conservative by the new standards. His campaign cited polls showing that a majority of potential Democratic-primary voters identified as moderate or conservative, and more than half were over the age of fifty. “The young left is important,” Anita Dunn, a top Biden adviser, told me. “But so are older white people above the age of sixty-five, because they actually gave the election to Donald Trump last time.”

In the spring of 2019, just before Biden announced his candidacy, he ran headlong into his past—and the widening gap in sensibilities between generations. Lucy Flores, a former Nevada state legislator, published an account of a public encounter with him at a 2014 rally in Las Vegas. He had smelled her hair, held her shoulders, and given her “a big slow kiss on the back of my head,” she wrote. For years, journalists had written about Biden’s uninvited displays of affection—bumping foreheads with women (and sometimes men), rubbing noses, whispering awkwardly in people’s ears. Flores, a Democrat, described feeling “anger” and “resentment.” She did not consider Biden’s behavior sexual—she has distinguished it from the allegations of assault and misconduct that more than twenty women have made against Trump in recent years. (Trump has denied these allegations.) But, Flores said, Biden’s habits showed “a lack of empathy for the women and young girls whose space he is invading.” Biden, who had prided himself on his tactile approach to retail politics, responded in a statement that “not once—never—did I believe I acted inappropriately. If it is suggested I did so, I will listen respectfully. But it was never my intention.”

At least six women added similar complaints. But others came forward to defend him, arguing that banishing Biden from a race against Trump, who bragged of grabbing women’s genitals, would be an act of misguided absolutism. Issues of gender flared again later in the campaign, after Tara Reade, a former Senate staffer, accused Biden of sexually assaulting her twenty-seven years earlier. She said that he pinned her to the wall in a Senate hallway, groped her, and penetrated her with his fingers. Biden emphatically denied the accusation. “It never, never happened,” he said on MSNBC. Some Democrats remained unsatisfied. Biden was seeking to be the standard-bearer of a party in which rising progressives disdained not only sex abuse and harassment but also the imbalances of power that had enabled the problems to persist.

Biden began the race as the front-runner, but he seemed unfocussed and out of step. During a debate, he botched an invitation to text the campaign at “30330” and instead declared, perplexingly, “Go to Joe 30330.” Rather than eliciting donations, it generated a night of Twitter memes, such as “How do you do, fellow kids?” In debates, he rarely fought back and sometimes yielded the floor with the unfortunate phrase “My time is up.” Donors backed away. By February, Biden’s campaign was spending less money in a month than Michael Bloomberg’s spent on an average day. Kate Bedingfield, the campaign’s communications director, struggled to draw attention to Biden’s policy ideas. “I say the word ‘achievable,’ and it gets derided as ‘That’s not ambitious,’ ” she told me.

At times, Biden’s disconnect looked deeper than his wobbly debate performances or his disinterest in social media. At a fund-raiser in June, 2019, he teed up an anecdote he had told for years about working with the segregationist senators Herman Talmadge, of Georgia, and James Eastland, of Mississippi. “We didn’t agree on much of anything,” Biden said. “We got things done. We got it finished. But today you look at the other side and you’re the enemy.” Biden added that Eastland “never called me ‘boy.’ He always called me ‘son.’ ”

A magazine cover features stories about people confessing to things.
Cartoon by Roz Chast
One of his rivals, Senator Cory Booker, of New Jersey, issued an immediate condemnation: “You don’t joke about calling Black men ‘boys.’ ” Booker told me that what frustrated him was not that Biden had worked with segregationists. “I work with people across the aisle who have beliefs that are offensive and that defend Confederate monuments,” he said. The problem was glibly boasting about it. “I did not, at that point, believe that Joe Biden understood that when people like my father were called ‘boy’ at work that that would be so humiliating to them,” Booker said. He admires Biden, which made it worse, he told me: “It was just one of those moments that many Black people feel, where you’re just, like, ‘You?’ ” Booker was walking out of a CNN studio when Biden called to apologize. “He was willing to show me a great degree of vulnerability and to put his imperfections on the table,” Booker recalled. “I’ve been in politics a long time—I know when I’m being worked over. I’ve watched him change and be willing to wrestle with this.”

ADVERTISEMENT
Biden finished a distant fourth in Iowa, and fifth in New Hampshire. The campaign was assessing how much money it would need in order to pay staffers if it shut down. Biden turned over his senior staff, promoting Dunn to the top of the campaign, and announced a promise to put the first Black woman on the Supreme Court. His polls barely budged. If he had any hope of staying in the race, it would come down to South Carolina, where Black voters make up roughly sixty per cent of the Democratic-primary electorate.

No one mattered more to that process than James Clyburn, the highest-ranking African-American in Congress and the godfather of South Carolina Democrats. During the civil-rights movement, he and John Lewis had helped found the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. Clyburn holds some distinctly progressive positions, on alleviating poverty and expanding community health centers, but he believes in hewing to the center. When his centrism leaves younger Black activists unsatisfied—as happened recently, after he tweeted “no to defunding the police”—Clyburn points to a display of hundreds of turtle sculptures in his office, representing a belief in slow and steady progress.

Less than a week before the primary, Clyburn and Biden were at a reception aboard the U.S.S. Yorktown, a retired aircraft carrier docked near Charleston. Biden had slid to second place, far behind Sanders. Clyburn ushered him into a private room and advised him, bluntly, that he needed to tighten up. “Your speeches are senatorial,” he said. “That’s not the way you win an election.” He continued, “You got to look at this the way my father, the fundamentalist preacher, did on Sunday mornings. He always did it in threes. This ain’t the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost. This is about ‘you, your family, and your community.’ ”

His urgency reflected an unapologetic pragmatism. Biden might not excite people in New York or Silicon Valley, but in South Carolina, where a white supremacist had massacred Black parishioners just after Trump announced his candidacy, the spectre of four more years of Trump was graver than any policy dispute. On February 26th, Clyburn supplied an emotional endorsement: “I’m fearful for my daughters and their future, and their children, and their children’s future.” With Biden at his side, he said, “We know Joe. But, most importantly, Joe knows us.”

Biden won South Carolina by twenty-nine points. With astonishing speed, his rivals dropped out and endorsed him. There were huge surges in turnout (up by nearly fifty per cent in Texas and a hundred per cent in Virginia), including many college-educated suburban independents and Republicans who had once supported candidates like Mitt Romney. On Super Tuesday, Biden won ten out of fourteen states. Sanders stayed in awhile longer, but the race was effectively over.

In barely three days, Biden had gone from the edge of oblivion to victory. He had received help not only from Clyburn but also from Warren, who swiftly dispatched Bloomberg, denouncing his derogatory comments about women. Yet Ron Klain, one of Biden’s closest advisers, said that it is wrong to suggest that the turnaround was a fluke—“like he somehow lucked into all this.” When Biden declined to savage his debate opponents, it was “strategic,” Klain said. “If the only way to get the nomination was to destroy all these other people, he was going to inherit a party that wasn’t going to win anyway.”

A less soaring telling of the primary is that Biden benefitted from fear of both Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders. Once it became clear that Biden was in a two-person race, the prospect of nominating Sanders was so unappealing to moderates—including some fellow-candidates, older Black voters in places like South Carolina, and big-money donors—that they scrambled to support Biden. But Biden had also prevailed by rejecting tribalism; even as his rivals said that he was too old, too conciliatory, and too tainted by his record, he resisted responding with attack ads. His advisers believed that Biden could prevail over the “doubt in the chattering class,” Bedingfield said. “We’re not going to spend all day trying to win the latest Twitter war.”

On June 1st, a week after the murder of George Floyd, I walked downtown from my home in D.C. to a protest in front of the White House. After a few nights of unrest in Washington, the scene had settled into a sit-in. Protesters took turns at a bullhorn.

Among the homemade signs, I noticed a strikingly skillful painting of Floyd. It was in the hands of Kandyce Baker, a thirty-one-year-old university administrator who had come to the rally from her home, in Frederick, Maryland. “I had to do something,” she told me. Baker had been especially shaken by the death of Ahmaud Arbery, who in February was tailed by three white men and shot to death while he jogged in a suburb in south Georgia. As a marathoner and a Black woman, Baker had often run through neighborhoods where she felt unwelcome. I asked her about Presidential politics. “Unfortunately, I will be voting for Biden,” she said. “Bernie Sanders was my candidate.” She went on, “I don’t have faith that Joe Biden is going to have Black issues at the forefront. I don’t feel like he’s going to have millennial issues at the forefront when it comes to student-loan debt. So I’m nervous.”

For Biden, a rejection by young Black and Latino voters could be a disaster. When Hillary Clinton ran in 2016, Black turnout declined for the first time in two decades; in some places, such as Milwaukee, the drop-off proved critical. “I’m going to vote for him because I can’t have Trump in office,” Baker said. “That’s literally the only reason.”

A few hours after I met Baker, the intersection where we talked was swarmed by police wielding batons and tear gas; they were there to sweep away protesters, so that Trump could walk over from the White House and pose with a Bible in front of St. John’s Episcopal Church. It was a pageant so roundly condemned that General Mark Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, publicly apologized for his presence. Within days, the N.F.L. reversed its position on kneeling during the national anthem. Booksellers across the country were swamped with orders for books about racism and Black history. Mississippi stripped the Confederate symbol from its flag.

Biden seized the moment. In a speech on July 4th, he urged listeners to “rip the roots” of “systemic racism” out of American life. He joined the calls for banning police choke holds, adopting a national standard for the use of force, and narrowing “qualified immunity,” the legal shield that protects public officials against federal civil-rights suits. Biden’s moves thrilled progressives but incensed some police. For years, he’d maintained cozy relations with the National Association of Police Organizations; now its executive director, Bill Johnson, lamented that he “used to be a stand-up guy.”

Biden leapt ahead in the polls, but, as ever, he was wary of tilting too far to the left. As long as Trump was inflaming liberals by running an openly racist campaign, Biden was not going to risk turning off moderate voters. Trump was already broadcasting a commercial that featured a ringing phone in a dark, empty police station. The narrator said, “If you’re calling to report a rape, please press one.” The ad ended with Trump’s new tagline: “You won’t be safe in Joe Biden’s America.”

Like most establishment Democrats, Biden rejected “defunding” police, a broad term for proposals that range from abolishing departments to moving money toward mental health, education, and social services. He said, however, that police should receive federal funding only if they met “basic standards of decency and honorableness,” and he proposed spending three hundred million dollars to reinvigorate a decades-old idea of “community policing.” David Kennedy, a professor at John Jay College of Criminal Justice, told me that he hopes Biden adopts a newer approach to violence prevention, focussing not on communities but on small numbers of individuals at the highest risk of being involved in gun violence. Such a program, applied nationally, “could cut in half the gun violence that devastates America’s minority communities, without doing the damage of traditional policing,” Kennedy said.

ADVERTISEMENT
When I spoke with Biden about the prospects for real change—to incarceration, policing, and entrenched racism—he offered an analogy to the civil-rights era, and the iconically cruel police boss of Birmingham. “When I was a kid in high school, Bull Connor sics his dogs on those elderly Black women going to church in their Sunday dress, and on little kids, with fire hoses, literally ripping their skin off,” he said. “He thought he was driving a wooden stake into the heart of the civil-rights movement.” Instead, images of the violence consolidated support behind Martin Luther King, Jr., and forced white leaders in Washington to take steps that led to the Voting Rights Act of 1965. In Biden’s telling, white people in America were now experiencing a similar awakening, prompted by the horrific images of police violence captured by cell phones. Lifting his phone from the arm of the chair, he said, “This phone has changed a lot of things. Watching Floyd’s face pinned against that curb and his nose being crushed, I mean, the vividness of it was, like, ‘Holy God. That still happens today?’ ”

Biden said that the year’s events had dismantled a myth deeply embedded in his consciousness. For years, he’d been telling a parable about the morning of Obama’s Inauguration: “I called my two sons and my daughter up, and I said, ‘Guys, don’t tell me things can’t change.’ ” Hunching forward in his seat, he told me that Trump had made a mockery of that parable. “I’m embarrassed to say, I thought you could defeat hate. You can’t. It only hides,” he said. “It crawls under the rocks, and, when given oxygen by any person in authority, it comes roaring back out. And what I realized is, the words of a President, even a lousy President, matter. They can take you to war, they can bring peace, they can make the market rise, they can make it fall. But they can also give hate oxygen.”

In the usual course of a Presidential campaign, a Democrat leans left during the primary and then marches right in the general election. Biden went the opposite direction. Exit polls had revealed a stark warning: even in states where he prevailed, many voters preferred the more ambitious plans, from Sanders and Warren, on issues like the economy and health care.

Within weeks, Biden had picked up Warren’s plan to ease student debt and overhaul the bankruptcy system—which entailed repealing parts of a law he helped pass. He embraced a limited version of Sanders’s plan for tuition-free college, and dropped his opposition to federal funding for abortions. Almost precisely a year after assuring skittish voters that “nothing would fundamentally change,” Biden said that America was due for “some revolutionary institutional changes.”

A rooster gives a hen a set of noisecancelling headphones as a gift.
“They’re the expensive, noise-cancelling kind, so you can finally sleep in.”
Cartoon by Sophie Lucido Johnson and Sammi Skolmoski
Once Biden secured the nomination, Sanders endorsed him—moving far more quickly than he had in 2016. “I have a better relationship with Joe Biden than I had with Hillary Clinton,” Sanders explained, candidly. To unify their platforms, Biden and Sanders set up task forces on criminal justice, economics, education, health care, immigration, and climate change. The task forces were a crucial test of whether the left and center factions of the Party could get along. Both sides were wary. Biden told me, “I had to be sure that Bernie was serious, that he wasn’t going to make this an ideological jihad. I said, ‘Bernie, if you want these set up in order for me to insist that I be for Medicare for All . . . this is not where it’s going to go.’ But I said, ‘I’m open, I hear you, I’m ready to listen.’ ”

Biden recruited Ocasio-Cortez to chair the climate task force, alongside former Secretary of State John Kerry. Members included Varshini Prakash, of the Sunrise Movement, which during the primary had graded Biden’s climate plan an F. At the first meeting, Kerry asked Prakash to speak first. The Sanders contingent wanted all-clean electricity by 2030; they were happy to settle for 2035. The biggest unresolved point of contention was fracking. “It’s not like I walked out of there with Bernie’s Green New Deal in hand, and I did not expect to,” Prakash said. “But it was a lot more collaborative, actually, than I was anticipating.”

Sean McElwee, an influential activist who co-founded the nonprofit think tank Data for Progress, criticized Biden fiercely at the outset of the campaign. He told me recently that his view had changed. “I think a lot of people who just shit on the Democratic Party haven’t spent a lot of time talking to mainstream actors within the Democratic Party ecosystem,” he said. “The reality is, that ecosystem is very liberal.” He continued, “I think people should just take a step back and look at what Biden has done. A.O.C. is someone I like a lot. She said that she wouldn’t vote for him in the primary, and that in a different country she would be in a different party from him. And he could have responded to that by being, like, ‘Fuck you.’ But instead he responded to that by being, like, ‘How about you come in and write my climate policy?’ ”

On a weekday afternoon in late July, Biden was at a preschool in New Castle, Delaware, preparing to talk about economics. Schools had been closed for months, because of the virus; on the playground, the swings were coiled out of reach. Inside, Biden was holding a simulacrum of a campaign event that resembled a scene from an avant-garde play: no crowds, no rope lines, just a scattering of reporters, each of us masked and marooned in a white cardboard ring. The P.A. system was playing Alicia Keys and Beyoncé to a silent, huddled assemblage.

The economic shutdown had produced what Jerome Powell, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, called a “level of pain that is hard to capture in words.” Forty per cent of the low-income Americans who had jobs in February lost them in March and early April. Twelve years after the financial crisis, the virus had again exploded corporate America’s mythology of self-reliance. Some of the largest payments in a congressional rescue package intended for small businesses went instead to the financial sector. Millions of dollars in emergency cash went to “family offices,” the personal investment companies that manage fortunes for hedge-fund billionaires and other wealthy individuals.

Biden stepped to the lectern to announce a $775-billion investment in the caregiving economy, providing funds for universal preschool, in-home care for the elderly, and paid family leave, of the sort that is routine in other developed nations. The plan clearly targeted the needs of Americans who strain to balance work with caring for children and, often, aging parents. “I was a single parent for five years,” Biden told the reporters. “Even though I had a lot more support than a lot of people going through tough times today, it was hard.” The plan, he said, was “a moral and economic imperative.” It would be funded partly by rolling back Trump-era tax breaks for real-estate investors. Ai-jen Poo, who leads the National Domestic Workers Alliance, tweeted that Biden’s proposal marked the first time in twenty years that a Presidential candidate had made “investments in the care economy a core strategy in their economic agenda. Not a side issue, an add-on, or a special interest.” A Trump-campaign spokesman responded to the proposal by saying that it would “remake America with socialist policies.”

The caregiving plan was the latest in a series of speeches in which Biden had called for sweeping economic changes. He planned to spend seven hundred billion dollars on American products and research, to create jobs around electric cars, artificial intelligence, and other technologies, without the tariffs and the xenophobia of Trump’s “America First” policy. He had announced a two-trillion-dollar clean-energy and infrastructure plan that would eliminate carbon emissions from power plants by 2035.

For all of Biden’s Rooseveltian zeal, it was unclear how far he would go on the explosive issues of wealth, taxes, and corporate exploitation. At a fund-raiser in July, hosted by investors and executives, Biden said, “Corporate America has to change its ways.” Then he added a comment that inflamed progressives: “It’s not going to require legislation. I’m not proposing any.” When we spoke, I asked what he meant. No legislation? “That is really shorthand,” Biden said. As he explained it, America’s corporate establishment has acknowledged the need for fundamental changes. He cited the Business Roundtable, a group of corporate C.E.O.s, which last year announced a shift away from the dominant focus on shareholder value. He said, “All those people understood that they are eating their own seed corn.”

Nevertheless, he told me that he would push for legislation: a measure, proposed by Warren, to forbid companies to use excess revenues to purchase their own stock, rather than to invest in wage increases or in research. Biden said, “I’ve been talking with a bunch of my economists, saying, ‘What are the types of legislation that require greater corporate responsibility?’ That has to occur.”

I sensed that Biden was straining to say as little as possible about his economic vision, which could be less a matter of tactical evasion than of ideological uncertainty. Biden is more than sentimentally attached to the working class, and he is embracing some leftist technocratic fixes that would help it. But he gives no indication that he is preparing for a bitter, costly fight to overturn the primacy of the corporate establishment. As Maurice Mitchell, of the Working Families Party, put it, “We’ve already put trillions of dollars into the economy with bailout after bailout. Are we propping up systems that have brought us here?”

As Trump sank in the polls, Biden reached numbers unmatched by any challenger to an incumbent since the advent of modern polling. Democrats weighed what would happen if they won. Biden said that he was seeking to “unify the nation.” But what could that mean? Is the pursuit of unity just a recipe for paralysis?

The prospect of unity helped lift Obama into the White House. But the valence of the concept has changed. “Obama raised people’s expectations,” Michael Kazin, a historian and the co-editor of the leftist quarterly Dissent, told me. “People on the left—to use this too-aggregated term—would say, ‘We like what he promised to do, but he didn’t follow through.’ The question is how much was his fault, how much was structural impediments, and how much was the timing and what he had to do to save the economy.” Kazin went on, “Some of it is because he believed in bipartisanship. He thought too much of his own abilities, I think, to persuade people on the basis of his personality and his rhetoric.”

When I spoke to Obama, he was at his house on Martha’s Vineyard, laboring over his Presidential memoir. He endorsed Biden soon after Sanders dropped out, and has played a surgical public role in the campaign—appearing alongside the candidate in a video conversation and at a fund-raiser. He and Biden speak frequently by phone, though they don’t draw much attention to those exchanges. Trump, after all, would love to portray a Biden Administration as a covert restoration of the Obama years.

ADVERTISEMENT
I asked Obama about young people who are dismayed that the Democratic establishment has not achieved greater progress. He raised the example of health care. “Joe and I were both painfully aware of some of the constraints and limitations,” he said. “But it’s what we could get done then, and twenty-plus million people got health insurance. Missouri just expanded Medicaid, so maybe that’s several hundred thousand more. And now you have an opportunity to make it that much better. So I think one response to the younger generation is, Yes, you should push harder! Because that’s how progress happens.”

Obama is touchy about suggestions that his Administration was too willing to compromise. “My legislative agenda, Joe’s legislative agenda, was at least as bold and aggressive as many of the young people’s agendas right now,” he said. “If you asked Joe and I what regrets we might have, or what lessons we learned from my Administration, it’s not that we were insufficiently bold in what we proposed. It’s that we continued to believe in the capacity of Republicans in Congress to play by the rules, and to be willing to negotiate and compromise.”

When Obama ran for reëlection, in 2012, he hoped that a victory would lead to a more amenable Congress. “The fever may break,” he said at the time, “because there’s a tradition in the Republican Party of more common sense than that.” That hope is long gone. “When I speak to young people, I say to them, Look, our climate proposals were very aggressive—we just couldn’t get them passed,” he told me. “And the reason we couldn’t get them passed was not because lobbyists and corporate donors were whispering in our ears! The reason we couldn’t pass them was because we didn’t have sixty votes in the Senate. And the same is true for getting a public option on health care, and getting immigration reform passed.” Obama went on, “Through its actions, the Republican Party has discredited the old-style negotiations and compromises that existed in Congress when Joe first came in. And it’s probably taken him a little time to let go of that, because I think he has experience of being able to get stuff done. And I think it’s been painful for him, to see what’s happened to institutions like the Senate.”

Biden often says that America “cannot function without generating consensus.” But, when he conjures the image of congressional harmony, many younger Americans think that he sounds deluded—or, worse, unwilling to join difficult fights. He was mocked last year for suggesting that members of Congress would undergo an “epiphany” after Trump was gone. To his mind, though, the prospects for bipartisanship hinge on the margin of victory. “If we win, and we pick up five or six Senate seats, I think there will be an epiphany,” he told me, “because all you need then is three, or four, or five Republicans who have seen the light a little bit.” He went on, “I don’t think you can underestimate the impact of Trump not being there. The vindictiveness, the pettiness, the willingness to, at his own expense, go after people with vendettas, like you saw with Sessions”—Jeff Sessions, the former Attorney General, whom Trump had helped torpedo in the recent Alabama primary.

The senior Obama Administration official worries that Biden’s optimism could be costly: “Does he see his role as someone who can bring in the Never Trumpers and build some bipartisan consensus? I know from experience that’s a trap. We walked right into it. Your people lose faith, the Republicans never give you credit, you waste a lot of time—and you end up with the Tea Party.”

Some analysts believe that Biden’s reputation as a centrist could make it easier for him to achieve changes that might seem more threatening coming from a doctrinaire progressive. In McElwee’s research, swing voters are more likely to support climate-change action if it is framed as a way to create good jobs and to bring down energy costs.

A young woman in therapy complains about not being able to meet anyone at home.
“I just want to meet someone without using a dating app but also without having to leave my apartment. Is that too much to ask?”
Cartoon by Akeem Roberts
Mike Donilon, who has advised Biden on and off for thirty years, told me that Biden believes people in Washington often negotiate in precisely the wrong way: “Everyone immediately goes to the bottom-line absolute toughest moment in the negotiation. They’re, like, ‘We’ve got to solve this before we solve anything else.’ So you don’t solve that—and you don’t solve anything else.” He said, “It doesn’t mean we compromise on principles, but you’ve got to at least see them.”

In Obama’s view, progressives will accept some flexibility if it produces results. “I don’t think it is the actual items on the policy checklist that they’re gonna be looking for,” he said. “What they’re gonna want to see is, Show us that you can make the machinery of government work to reflect what we believe in and what we care about. Show us that if the majority of Americans support doing something about climate change, that you can actually get something done, and it doesn’t just get ground down to nothing by the time it gets through the U.S. Senate or the U.S. House.”

If Biden is elected, his prescriptions for America’s troubles will be informed by two divergent strands of his biography: the myths that undergird the politics of responsibility, and his own encounters with misfortune. In a new book, “The Tyranny of Merit,” the Harvard political philosopher Michael Sandel writes, “Even as inequality has widened to vast proportions, the public culture has reinforced the notion that we are responsible for our fate and deserve what we get. . . . If we succeed, it is thanks to our own doing, and if we fail, we have no one to blame but ourselves.” In the age of pandemic and systemic injustice, Sandel argues, “a lively sense of the contingency of our lot can inspire a certain humility: ‘There, but for the grace of God, or the accident of birth, or the mystery of fate, go I.’ ”

Biden, ever the weathervane, is betting that America wants a different politics. He understands what goes on in the minds of Congress members—the balancing, the hedging, the triangulation—and he believes that at least a few of them are ready to coöperate with him. But his image of unity puts even greater weight on a force beyond the political mechanics of Washington: the prospect of making people feel as if someone in the capital is listening.

Every day, Biden’s aides try to get him on the phone with a regular person. One afternoon in April, he was patched through to Mohammad Qazzaz, in Dearborn, Michigan. Three weeks earlier, Qazzaz, who runs a coffee-roasting business, had tested positive for covid-19. When Biden called, he was quarantined in his house, trying to protect his wife and two children.

Qazzaz, who recorded the call and played it for me, told Biden that his daughter, who is two, did not understand why he would not come out of his bedroom: “She keeps telling me, ‘Baba, open the door. Open the door.’ ” As he described his situation, his voice broke, and he tried to steady himself. “I’m sorry, Mr. Vice-President,” he said.

“Don’t be sorry,” Biden said. “I think your emotional state is totally justified. And, as my mom would say, you have to get it out.”

ADVERTISEMENT
Biden told Qazzaz that he, too, once had children too small to understand a crisis unfolding around them. “Nothing is the same, but I have some sense of what you’re going through,” Biden said. He suggested that Qazzaz play a simple game with his daughter through the door, asking her to guess a number or a color. “Tell her stories about what it’s going to be like when Daddy gets better,” he said. They talked for a while about Qazzaz’s father, who emigrated from Jerusalem. “Look, you’re going to get through this,” Biden said. “We are the nation we are because we’re a nation of immigrants.” The call was supposed to last five minutes; they talked for twenty-two.

Listening to Qazzaz’s call was reminiscent of Roosevelt’s famous line: “The Presidency is not merely an administrative office. . . . It is preëminently a place of moral leadership.” Joe Biden’s life is replete with mistakes and regrets. And, if he comes to the Presidency, he is unlikely to supply much of the exalted rhetoric that reaches into a nation’s soul. But, for a people in mourning, he might offer something like solace, a language of healing.

For years, Biden has relied on a small clutch of aides, including Donilon, Klain, and Kaufman—a lineup that Politico Magazine described last year as “a lot like Biden: old and white and with long experience in Democratic party battles of a bygone era.” The portrait ignores the likes of Symone Sanders, a thirty-year-old former Bernie Sanders aide who is among the most influential Black advisers in Biden’s campaign. But Biden recognizes that meeting the needs of the country will require a radical expansion of the people and the experiences represented around him. “I think it’s really important—really, really important—that my Administration look like the country,” he said.

In August, Biden picked Kamala Harris, the junior senator from California, as his running mate. She would be the first Black person, the first South Asian, and the first woman to serve as Vice-President. At Biden’s side for the announcement, Harris showed a ready appetite for the fray, saying of Trump’s economy, “Like everything else he inherited, he ran it straight into the ground,” and hammering him for the fact that “an American dies of covid-19 every eighty seconds.” Trump and his surrogates struggled to agree on a mode of attack; they mocked Harris’s voice and her name, and, in an e-mail to supporters, called her “the meanest, most horrible, most disrespectful, MOST LIBERAL of anyone in the U.S. Senate.”

Harris, like Biden, was never the choice of progressives. Though she has one of the Senate’s most liberal voting records, progressives are uncomfortable with many of her choices as a district attorney and as California’s attorney general, when she hesitated to make some police reforms and aggressively prosecuted truancy. After the announcement, I called Kandyce Baker, who had described herself as “unfortunately” supporting Biden. Baker was pleased to have a Black woman on the ticket but wary of the political calculations. “I’m all for candidates changing their position or recognizing, like, ‘Hey, that was 2015, and now I have more information.’ But I need Kamala to explain what happened,” Baker said. “It’s not enough to just say you’ve evolved.”

When Harris spoke at the Democratic National Convention, in late August, she offered more encouragement than explanations. “I’m so inspired by a new generation,” she said. “You are pushing us to realize the ideals of our nation.” The Convention, like so many things these days, was confined to screens, but the constraints only accentuated the sense of personal urgency. Obama presented an appeal to Americans, especially the young, to reject cynicism and apathy. “That’s how a democracy withers until it’s no democracy at all, and we cannot let that happen,” he said. In his telling, individualism conveyed responsibility, not license. “Do not let them take away your power,” he said.

It was all a prelude to Biden’s sobering case for moral decency, for reasonableness, for mourning what he called this “season of darkness.” In a speech that did not mention Trump by name, Biden argued that Americans are not captive to the failures of the past and the present. “I will draw on the best of us, not the worst,” he declared, and quoted Ella Baker, the icon of civil rights, who said, “Give people light and they will find a way.”

One after another, ordinary people attested to enduring hardship. Kristin Urquiza, a thirty-nine-year-old from Arizona, told the story of her father, Mark Anthony Urquiza, who had voted for Trump, believed his assurances about the pandemic, and, she said, “died alone, in the I.C.U., with a nurse holding his hand.” Brayden Harrington, a thirteen-year-old from New Hampshire, gave credit to Biden for telling him that they belonged to “the same club—we stutter.” The official roll call, usually a banal ritual on the Convention floor, was reborn as a video parade, surveying America’s diversity and vastness, from the Caribbean to the Dakotas and Alaska. The effect was strange and comforting and exhilarating, befitting an era in which Americans are waking to an unsettling conviction: a politician may give us light, or at least not obscure it, but we must find the way. ♦