 The Friday Cover is POLITICO Magazine's email of the week's best, delivered to your inbox every Friday morning. By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or updates from POLITICO and you agree to our privacy policy and terms of service. You can unsubscribe at any time and you can contact us here. This sign-up form is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. 
Allison Shelley for Politico Magazine 
The POLITICO Mag Profile 
The new Saudi ambassador grew up in America, then pushed to empower women in the kingdom. But she takes the job at a time of deep skepticism toward the government in Riyadh—a regime she resolutely defends.  
By ELISE LABOTT October 31, 2019 Elise Labott is a reporter in Washington and journalist-in-residence at Georgetown University’s School of Foreign Service. On a hot Friday morning in early August, the sound of giggles and whispers permeated the usually uninviting lobby of the Saudi Arabian Embassy in Washington, as some 50 female embassy employees gathered in the ballroom to meet their new boss. Princess Reema bint Bandar Al Saud, Saudi Arabia’s ambassador to the United States, had been in Washington for only a few weeks, and this was her first group meeting of embassy staff—but only the women. The room was hushed as she entered, in pants and a black and white jacket, without the customary headscarf worn in male company. She stopped short of the podium and sat on a set of steps, eye to eye with her employees. “Today, it’s just the women,” she said. “It is our day to celebrate.”  Earlier that day, the Saudi government had announced it was relaxing the country’s so-called guardianship system, a mixture of laws and customs requiring women to get permission from men in their families to make all manner of personal decisions. The ambassador talked the women through their new rights, including obtaining passports and traveling abroad, registering marriages, filing for divorce and serving as legal guardians for children. Despite her royal status, the princess explained that, as a divorced mother, she was only now the head of her own household. “You have unalienable rights now,” she told the women. “The right to your own identity, to move, dream, work.” But the new freedoms, she cautioned, came with new responsibilities. “Know where your money is,” she told them. Be “gracious” to Saudi men, who have no user manual to navigate this new world. “We are going to have to have a very emotional learning curve on what we are now allowed to do,” she said. It was a historic moment, both for Saudi Arabia and for its embassy: Princess Reema is now the first woman to serve as Saudi ambassador to any country. She was already something of a celebrity back home in Riyadh, having agitated for Saudi women to enjoy the same rights and freedoms she experienced growing up in Washington, where her father, Prince Bandar bin Sultan, served as ambassador from 1983 to 2005. Now, many Saudis see her as a symbol to the United States of Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman’s ambitious plan to modernize Saudi society and a personification of the new possibilities available to Saudi women.  Yet it is unclear how much even a reform-minded, U.S.-raised daughter of a diplomat can do for the Saudis in Washington right now: Princess Reema, 44, arrives at a time of deep distrust between the United States and Saudi Arabia—and, in particular, the crown prince, who is considered the power behind the throne of his father, King Salman. The Saudi-led war in Yemen, the government’s detention of activists and dissenters, and the U.S. intelligence community’s assessment that the crown prince himself ordered the brutal killing of Washington Post columnist Jamal Khashoggi have left official Washington perhaps more skeptical than ever of the U.S. alliance with Riyadh. “She is stepping into this job when it is probably the toughest time for a Saudi ambassador,” says Elisa Massimino, the former CEO of Human Rights First and now a professor at Georgetown Law Center. “It’s not just because of Khashoggi, but a bipartisan effort to recalibrate the entire U.S.-Saudi relationship.” In her first interview since arriving in Washington, the ambassador was well aware that neither her résumé nor her history of advocacy on behalf of women will easily change the perception among Saudi Arabia’s critics that her appointment is simply a public relations stunt to distract from widespread concerns over the crown prince, also known as MBS. “Everyone has the right to their own opinion, and I would like to be judged on the quality of my work,” she told me in September, in her spacious top floor office. “I am not here with bubble wrap, and I would be offended if I was treated with kid gloves.” She likely won’t be. While the princess might be a revolutionary in some respects, she represents—and fiercely defends—a regime that many in Washington associate more closely with horrific human rights abuses. The ambassador, in spite of her own record of pushing for women’s rights, downplays MBS’ detention of several dozen women activists. She also told me she “never had a shadow of a doubt” about the crown prince’s professed innocence in the Khashoggi death, in spite of the CIA’s conclusion to the contrary. (In a pair of recent television interviews marking the one-year anniversary of the murder, MBS took responsibility, as Saudi Arabia’s de facto ruler, but continued to deny being personally involved.) 
Princess Reema bint Bandar Al Saud, shown on at the Embassy in Washington, is the first woman to serve as Saudi ambassador to the United States, representing a country where women have long had fewer rights than men. One of her predecessors is her father, Bandar bin Sultan Al Saud, whose picture hangs in the Embassy, at the end of the top row of frames above. | Allison Shelley for Politico Magazine In Washington, Princess Reema, like her predecessors, has been meeting with lawmakers and administration officials, while launching a new, broader effort to bridge the cultural divide between America and Saudi Arabia, with a West Coast trip in her first few weeks on the job. But Saudi critics on Capitol Hill are already signaling their skepticism that the princess, no matter her intentions, can have much sway because of the government she represents. “The ambassador is undoubtedly impressive,” says Senator Chris Murphy of Connecticut, who has met with her. “But I don’t know how much that matters if the policy she is explaining is completely backwards and contrary to our country’s national security interests.” There are also questions about her influence, given that the crown prince has a direct line to Jared Kushner, President Donald Trump’s son-in-law and special adviser, who is attending a major economic summit in Riyadh this week. One senior U.S. administration official who knows Princess Reema and asked to remain anonymous to speak candidly about her calls her a “serious person” who could make inroads with lawmakers and other officials—the Trump administration, after all, has steadfastly defended the Saudis—and could soften Riyadh’s reputation. “Her job is clear, which is to erase some of the negative view people have of the kingdom,” says Karen Elliott House, author of On Saudi Arabia: Its People, Past, Religion, Fault Lines and Future. “And she is a good choice to do that. She is not just a princess and a woman. She is a dedicated and driven single mother. She actually has a lot in common with the American woman.” Still, anyone looking for a wink-wink or private eye roll suggesting that the princess harbors doubts about her boss will be disillusioned. She says she is a “true believer” in MBS’ vision for reforming and advancing Saudi Arabia, and she wants Americans to see that vision, too.  “My job is to clarify that narrative,” the ambassador says. “My job is to hear the tone here, understand the sentiment and convey it back home.” *** Reema bint Bandar Al Saud is about as royal as one can get in the kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Her father, Prince Bandar, is the grandson of the late King Abdulaziz, and her mother, Princess Haifa bint Faisal, is the daughter of the late King Faisal, Abdulaziz’s third son. That makes Reema a direct descendant of Abdulaziz, also known as Ibn Saud—the founder of modern Saudi Arabia—on both sides of the family. But Princess Reema, who was 7 years old when her family moved to Washington for her father’s posting, had as much of an American upbringing as a Saudi one. Raised in the Muslim faith, she and her seven siblings grew up eating Betty Crocker, McDonald’s and buckets of KFC, she says. Weekends were spent as a family—movies on Saturdays, followed by Pizza Hut or Chinese food at Peking Gourmet, where her father’s picture still hangs on the wall. Sundays were for barbecue and watching football at the family farmhouse in Maryland. She was trailed by a security detail as a kid, but she says, “We weren’t raised to be little royals.” She insists her father, one of the most powerful and well-connected diplomats in Washington, “made life as normal as possible.” 
The princess—shown here with her family at their home in McLean, Virginia, in 1983—insists her father, one of the most powerful and well-connected diplomats in Washington, “made life as normal as possible.” | Courtesy of the Al Saud family After earning a degree in museum studies from The George Washington University in 1999, Reema initially pursued a career in the art world—and soon began running up against Saudi social customs for women. In 2008, she returned to Riyadh with plans to oversee portions of her mother’s Islamic art collection that were about to go on display at the Saudi National Museum, but the museum refused to employ a woman. Her family, which has a more progressive reputation on women’s issues in Saudi Arabia, instead donated the art to a women’s financial literacy organization launched by Reema’s grandmother, Queen Iffat. Reema also co-owned the first women-only gym and day spa in Riyadh. When she and two cousins opened it, Saudi regulations limited women to owning only one type of business—seamstress shops—so they set aside one room for a seamstress and a sewing machine, with the rest of the spa intact. “I didn’t grow up with the rigidity of Saudi society. … When I came back, and said, ‘I want to do 1, 2 or 3,’ and the law didn’t say, ‘No,’ I just did it,” the princess says. “I appeared to be overstepping and pushing boundaries, but I didn’t have those boundaries in my head. I felt comfortable and morally correct.” By 2010, Reema had become the first female CEO of a major retail company in Saudi Arabia, taking over the Riyadh branch of Harvey Nichols, whose parent company is owned by her family. Within a few months, King Abdullah, the current king’s predecessor, issued a decree requiring stores to hire female staff in women’s departments. The princess, seeing an opportunity, ousted several dozen seasoned salesmen, provided child care and transportation for her new female employees, and helped them open their own bank accounts to deposit their salaries, she says, telling them, “The money that you make is yours.” It was a radical social experiment in a country where women traditionally didn’t interact with men, except relatives, outside the home. Profits fell. The Saudi religious police regularly shut down the store for not following guidelines curtailing women’s interaction with men, but Reema appealed the closures with the Ministry of Labor and would be up and running again. “A royal may have more courage than the average person to push the boundaries, but in the kingdom, people are increasingly making their own change by doing what they want to do and getting away with it,” explains Elliott House. “It’s easier to ask for forgiveness than to ask for permission. Yes, that’s an American phrase, but it is a Saudi practice.” 
After returning to Saudi Arabia, Princess Reema—shown above at a 2018 economic conference in Riyadh and below at a girls’ soccer tournament in New York this fall—launched a career as a businesswoman, working to help other Saudi women enter the workforce too. | Top: Saudi Press Agency; bottom: Minsk In 2013, after an amicable divorce from Prince Faisal bin Turki, with whom she has two children, Reema founded Alf Khair, an organization to provide guidance for Saudi women entering the workforce. Through the same organization, she began advocating for breast cancer awareness. “It was scandalous,” she recalls—even the word “breast” is taboo in Saudi Arabia, as is the idea of self-exams—but the Saudi government backed the public health campaign. Her work attracted the attention of the head of the Saudi General Sports Authority, which promotes sports and physical fitness, and in 2016 the princess became the GSA’s first female deputy director of planning and development and vice president of women’s affairs. In her first year, she says, she worked from home to avoid an inhospitable environment for women; when she finally started showing up at the office, men wouldn’t get in the elevator with her for months. That year, the crown prince tasked all government agencies with finding ways to improve quality of life in Saudi Arabia. Princess Reema worked to implement a plan for physical education in girls schools, the licensing of female gyms and the use of public spaces for women to play sports alongside men. “She fought with about five or six ministries for some of these changes and spoke her mind without people feeling threatened,” says Fawaz Farooqui, a male colleague at the time. “She just kept showing up and speaking to all levels of government, respectfully, and changed the mind of these government employees one by one until they said, ‘OK.’” During one all-hands meeting, the chairman of the quality of life initiative asked the department heads about obstacles they faced. The princess raised her hand. “It was a roomful of men,” she recalls. “I said, ‘If women have to keep asking for permission of a man to engage in all of these wonderful things, this isn’t going to be achievable. And if women cannot drive themselves or get themselves to participate in any of this, it’s not going to happen. And, so, what would it look like if these two major obstacles could go away?’” She was concerned she might have overstepped until a few weeks later, when she was appointed as head of a new committee to reduce obstacles to women’s engagement in society. King Salman soon issued a royal decree to identify these obstacles. About two years later, he announced Saudi women would finally be allowed to drive. Around the same time, the regime, now largely under MBS’ direction, began cracking down on female dissenters, including jailing several dozen women activists who pushed for the right to drive and fought against the guardianship system. Reema, even as she had pushed for gender equality, saw the global reaction to the imprisonments as overblown. She notes that most of the women have been released; several, however, are still in detention, one of whom Amnesty International alleges has been tortured in prison. (The Saudi government denies this.) The princess believes that the detained women broke the law by campaigning publicly rather than privately for those new rights, and that reforms—including the rollbacks to the guardianship system announced this past summer—were already on their way. 
In recent years, Saudi Arabia has granted women the right to drive and relaxed its “guardianship” system by finally allowing women to travel abroad, register marriages and divorces, and become their children’s guardians without first getting permission from men in their families. | Getty Images She stepped forward to defend the Kingdom, insisting that the West was viewing Saudi Arabia’s transformation unfairly. “You ask us to change, and then when we exhibit change, you come to us with cynicism,” she told the audience at the World Economic Forum in 2018. “We’re not doing gender equality because the West wants it, or because it will target Human Rights Watch and get them off our backs, or because Amnesty International is going to say, ‘Great, good job.’ We’re doing it because it is right.” “It really did make her a rock star in Saudi,” recalls May al-Dayel, the daughter of a Saudi diplomat who grew up in the United States with the princess and remains a close friend. “She said what everyone wanted to say, which is that we are trying to change at our own pace.” But the contradiction between Reema’s own advocacy and her defense of MBS was not lost on some observers. “There are women who were pushing for the right to participate in elections, to drive, to gain control over their own lives, who are now in jail,” says Kristin Diwan, a senior resident scholar at the Arab Gulf States Institute who has written about gender in Saudi Arabia. “They took risks to advance the very agenda MBS is now pursuing. I think it’s completely legitimate to challenge [the princess] on why this is taking place.” “She will be a great example of the public roles now entrusted to Saudi women,” Diwan adds. “But she will also serve as a constant reminder of those women reformers who remain imprisoned.” *** In 2017, Reema was sent to Washington ahead of the crown prince’s multicity tour of the United States. MBS’ brother Khalid bin Salman, the ambassador to the United States at the time, was expected to take a leadership position back home in the future, and Reema was being whispered about as his possible replacement; the royal court had assigned her to several high-level working groups and committees dealing with the U.S.-Saudi relationship. “She came across as a dynamic personality,” recalls Wendy Chamberlin, then-president of the Middle East Institute, which hosted the princess for lunch at its headquarters in Washington. “She knows Washington. She speaks Washington. She is someone we can relate to.” But now, Chamberlin quickly adds, “The outrage over Jamal Khashoggi’s brutal murder runs deep, and this is not something that can be easily fixed.” Young Saudis refer to a time “before JK” and “after JK.” Before Jamal Khashoggi—a journalist and former adviser to the royal family who became a critic of MBS—was murdered inside the Saudi Consulate in Istanbul on October 2, 2018, the West cheered the crown prince’s plans for social and economic transformation. But as details emerged about Khashoggi’s brutal killing—at the hands, the CIA determined, of members of MBS’ inner circle and with his knowledge—the country faced an uncertainty similar to after September 11, 2001, when most of the hijackers responsible for the attacks were found to be Saudi. Trump refused to acknowledge the CIA’s conclusion about MBS’ involvement, but much of the rest of Washington, including some of the president’s political allies, was enraged. Reema, whose family was close to members of the prominent Khashoggi clan, saw the murder as both a personal tragedy and a professional landmine. “I was mourning the loss of this man’s life on a personal level, and I was mourning what could have been the end of our vision,” she says. “What he wrote about was everything positive the Kingdom could be. … Out of respect for him, someone to me who was like family, I would hope people wouldn’t use his death to hold 11 million young people hostage.” (Attempts to reach Khashoggi’s family for comment were unsuccessful.) 
Under the de facto leadership of Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman—at bottom left with his father, King Salman—Saudi Arabia has faced intense criticism over the murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi at the Saudi consulate in Istanbul in 2018, as well as the detention of activists and dissidents. | Getty Images; AP Reema firmly stood by MBS’ assertion that he did not order the killing, even after the CIA determined with “medium to high confidence” that he did. “I had, at that point, spent enough time with the crown prince to know this is not his M.O.,” she says. “This is not how he operates, and this is something that would destroy everything he has dreamt of. And I could not in my life imagine that he would ask for this to be done.” Pressed for an explanation, she says it’s possible people around MBS committed the murder without checking with him, thinking they were solving a problem. After the killing, Prince Khalid was effectively persona non grata in Washington and quickly returned to Riyadh, and in February, MBS appointed Reema as the successor—a decision met in Washington with a mix of skepticism and intrigue. In July, she started the job once held by her father, moving into the same house in McLean, Virginia, where she grew up. At her father’s suggestion, she asked for advice from some of his former colleagues and friends, including former Secretary of State Colin Powell, who was close to Prince Bandar when he served in Washington. She readily admits her father leaves big shoes to fill. He was a towering figure in Saudi diplomacy—charming, talented and close to both the Saudi king and the upper echelons of Washington society, particularly the Bush family, earning him the nickname “Bandar Bush.” “Bandar’s skill was very much behind the curtain, very private,” says Richard Murphy, who served as U.S. ambassador to Saudi Arabia and a top State Department diplomat during Bandar’s era. “The kind of access he had to the administration was unparalleled.” (Bandar still visits Washington periodically from the region and, unlike some other members of the royal family, remains in the good graces of the current Saudi government.) Princess Reema’s approach to the job, so far, has been more public and focused more broadly than her predecessors’. While her immediate task is to nurture the political alliance between Washington and Riyadh as her father did, she says her instinct is to work more on what she calls the “soft side of social change.” She wants the U.S.-Saudi story to no longer focus just on counterterrorism or oil, talking instead of a “comprehensive partnership” in business, culture and education. She is also trying to portray Saudi Arabia as a more tolerant society too, and recently sent the embassy’s Jewish contacts a greeting for Rosh Hashanah. 
As ambassador, Prince Bandar was close to both the Saudi king and the upper echelons of Washington society, particularly the Bush family, earning him the nickname “Bandar Bush.” | AP; Getty Images Over the summer, the princess traveled to Los Angeles to host a “sports diplomacy workshop.” In a hotel ballroom, she introduced a handful of American agents and former athletes to Neom, a new $500 billion city on Saudi Arabia’s northwestern coast that seeks to compete with neighboring Dubai as a tourist destination and sports training hub. The athletes were enthusiastic, as were executives she visited at Space X, with whom she hopes to work to help develop the Saudi space industry. There was more of a mixed reception among the Hollywood executives she met, who are still concerned about the optics of doing business in the Kingdom. In New York, a month later, between meetings with world leaders at the United Nations General Assembly, the princess attended the playoffs of the Global Girls World Cup. When she arrived to cheer on the female Saudi soccer club, which she had helped form in Riyadh, she was mobbed for selfies. To skeptics—and Saudi Arabia has many—it will take more than these kinds of efforts to soften the kingdom’s image in Congress and among the American public. Many Washington insiders still see both MBS’ reform agenda and the appointment of the first female Saudi ambassador as an effort to paper over the crown prince’s repression at home and abroad. In the past two years, MBS has overseen not only the roundup of female activists, but also the detention of intellectuals who disagree with his policies and of Lebanese Prime Minister Saad Hariri, as well as the imprisonment—and allegedly, in some cases, torture—of 200 prominent businessmen, former officials and princes at the Ritz-Carlton in Riyadh, in what he presented as an anti-corruption effort but which human rights group said was meant to reclaim assets for the kingdom. “At the same time they are touting their bona fides as reformers, they have gone around the world to round up Saudi dissidents in a way that has never happened before,” says Murphy, one of the Senate’s lead backers of legislation earlier this year to block the Trump administration’s arms sales to Saudi Arabia, which the president vetoed. “At the same time they are getting credit for allowing women to drive, they are putting women political activists in jail in a way they never did before the crown prince was in charge.” Princess Reema’s government also has been criticized for thousands of civilian casualties in the Saudi-led war on Yemen, and for creating what the United Nations says is the world’s worst humanitarian crisis. The princess, who has been meeting with U.S. officials about the issue, both understands and rejects these criticisms. “The United States doesn’t have a border with Yemen, and you aren’t being attacked day in and day out with missiles over your borders,” she says, referring to cross-border attacks by Iran-aligned Houthi rebels in Yemen. (Earlier this month, the Trump administration announced it was sending 3,000 U.S. troops to bolster Saudi defenses.)  
Princess Reema is focusing on what she calls the “soft side of social change”—business, culture and education. But to skeptics of Saudi Arabia, these efforts aren’t enough to erase the stain left by the crown prince’s repression at home and abroad. | Allison Shelley for Politico Magazine Jon Alterman, vice president and Middle East director at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, says that on these and other policy matters, Princess Reema’s effectiveness will be limited as long as the relationship with the U.S. is personalized as being about MBS and not about Saudi Arabia. “Identifying change in Saudi Arabia with the crown prince is going to inhibit many individuals and organizations from affiliating closely with Saudi Arabia, and that is what she is trying to overcome,” he says. “That’s going to take time.” So far, several senior U.S. officials say they have found Reema to be well-connected with the government in Riyadh, including the crown prince, despite his reputation for having few confidants. For her part, she says, “I have never felt more respected and more heard from my leadership than I do right now,” adding of MBS: “The cloud he is swimming in is profoundly unfair.” While that loyalty to MBS turns off many in Washington, the senior U.S. administration official says it could also be the princess’ key to gaining the influence she needs with the crown prince to advance her own social agenda. “Reema is one of the few people who can potentially try to sway him,” the official says. “There is an absence of figures in the Saudi system who can reorient him and push in a different direction from doing things that are bad. She is energetic. She knows more needs to be done. I have faith she will be a good asset.” 
California 

By Jeremy B. White
 
Updated 05/08/20 09:44 PM EDT 

By Sam Sutton and Carly Sitrin
 

By Bill Mahoney and Josh Gerstein
 
Updated 03/29/20 02:48 PM EDT 
  © 2020 POLITICO LLC